reams, 

"evolution", 

AND VALUE 
FULFILLMENT 

Volume I 



BOOKS BY JANE ROBERTS 


How to Develop Your ESP Power • 1966 
The Seth Material • 1970 

Seth Speaks: The Eternal Validity of the Soul • 1972 
The Education of Oversoul Seven • 1973 
The Nature of Personal Reality (A Seth Book) • 1974 
Adventures in Consciousness: An Introduction to Aspect 
Psychology 1975 

Dialogues of the Soul and Mortal Self in Time * 1975 Psychic 
Politics: An Aspect Psychology Book • 1976 The "Unknown" 
Reality (A Seth Book, two volumes) • 1977-1979 
The World View of Paul Cezanne: A Psychic 

Interpretation • 1977 The After Death Journal of an 
American Philosopher: 

The World View of William James • 1978 The Further 
Education of Oversoul Seven • 1979 Emir's Education in the Proper 
Use of Magical Powers • 1979 The Nature of the Psyche: Its Human 
Expression (A Seth 
Book) • 1979 

The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events (A Seth Book) • 

1981 

The God of Jane: A Psychic Manifesto *1981 

If We Live Again: Or, Public Magic and Private Love • 1982 

Oversoul Seven and the Museum of Time *1984 



A SETH BOOK 


Dreams, 

’’evolution”, 

AND VALUE 
FULFILLMENT 


Volume I 

Jane Roberts 

Introductory Essays and Notes by 

Robert F. Butts 


PRENTICE HALL PRESS • NEW YORK 



Copyright © 1986 by Jane Roberts All 
rights reserved, including the right of 
reproduction in whole or in part in any 

Published by Prentice Hall Press 
A Division of Simon &amp; Schuster, Inc. 

Gulf + Western Building 
One Gulf + Western Plaza 
New York, NY 10023 

PRENTICE HALL PRESS is a trademark of Simon &amp; Schuster, Inc. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Roberts, Jane, 1929-1984 Dreams, "evolution," and 
value fulfillment. 

Includes index. 

1. Spirit writings. 2. Reincarnation. I. Title. 

BF1301.R589 1986 133.9'3 86-507 ISBN 0-13- 

219452-X 

Manufactured in the United States of America 
10 98765432 



This book is dedicated to my 
husband, Robert F. Butts, for 
his love and devotion. 



Contents 


Quotations from Seth 9 

A Poem and Commentary by Jane Roberts 11 

Introductory Essays by Robert F. Butts 13 

Preface by Seth 95 

Chapter 1 Before the Beginning 119 

Chapter 2 In the Beginning 137 

Chapter 3 Sleepwalkers. The World in Early Trance. 

The Awakening of the Species 166 

Chapter 4 The Ancient Dreamers 192 

Chapter 5 The "Garden of Eden." Man "Loses" 

His Dream Body and Gains a "Soul" 224 

Chapter 6 Genetic Heritage and Reincamational 

Predilections 259 

Index 286 



Quotations from Seth 


(A note by R.F.B.: The following quotations are from sessions Jane delivered 
for her trance personality, Seth, just before and during the time she worked with 
him on Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment. One is from a private 
session, two are from "nonbook" regular sessions, and one is from Dreams 
itself) 

"Science has unfortunately bound up the minds of its own even most 
original thinkers, for they dare not stray from certain scientific principles. All 
energy contains consciousness (underlined). That one sentence is basically 
scientific heresy, and in many circles it is religious heresy as well. A 
recognition of that simple statement would indeed change your world." 

— From a private session, July 12, 1979 

"I feel sometimes as if I am expected to justify life's conditions, when of 
course they do not need any such justification." 

— From Session 896 , January 16, 1980 

"... basically, consciousness has nothing to do with size. If that were the 
case, it would take more than a world-sized globe to contain the consciousness 
of simply one cell" 

— From Session 917 , May 21 , 1980 , in Chapter 8 of Dreams 

"It is a gift, a boon, an exquisite pleasure, to become physically alive on 
your functioning planet, couched securely within your dusk and dawn, your 
existence supported by the seasons and by an overall operation of spontaneous 
order." 

— From Session 929 , November 26 , 1980 



A Poem and Commentary 

by Jane Roberts 


(Jane experienced many painful physical and psychological delays while producing 
Dreams. Finally, she had only six sessions to go for the book when she came through 
with this material for herself) 

"On Friday, October 23, 1981, 1 received the following message from Seth: 'Attend 
to what is directly before you. You have no responsibility to save the world or find the 
solutions to all problems — but to attend to your particular personal comer of the 
universe. As each person does that, the world saves itself.' 

"The same day I wrote: 

Dawn is breaking. 

Why should I lie in bed 

worrying about my body or the world? 

Before time was recorded 
dawn has followed dusk 
and all the creatures of the earth 
have been couched 
in the loving context 
of their times. 

"After writing the above poem I felt a sense of faith — and realized that like many 
I'd become afraid of faith itself. It was a fear hidden in my deepest aspects. ..." 



Introductory Essays 

by Robert F. Butts 


August 12, 1982. Originally I'd planned to write the standard kind of 
introduction for Dreams, "Evolution, " and Value Fulfillment. However, 
as I became involved in describing the complicated, emotionally 
charged series of events surrounding the hospitalization earlier this year 
of my wife, Jane Roberts, the material automatically began organizing 
itself into a series of dated essays. I was more than happy to follow this 
intuition from my creative self, for it answered many questions I'd 
started to consciously worry about. 

We could have presented Dreams as is, or at least have avoided 
mentioning certain less-than-advantageous circumstances surrounding 
its production by Jane and by Seth, the "energy personality essence" she 
speaks for while in a trance or dissociated state. The facts are, though, 
that Jane's already impaired physical condition grew steadily worse 
while she was working on the book. Shortly after finishing it, she went 
into the hospital. Since we've always wanted to make sure that our 
"psychic work" is given within the context of our daily living, I've 
undertaken to present in these essays intensely personal material 
relevant to the creation of Dreams. (The mechanics of Jane's still- 
fascinating trance phenomenon have been described in some detail in 
the six previous Seth books she's produced — with my help — and they'll 
also be referred to, if briefly, in Dreams.) 

I worked on the essays in succession, just as they're given here, 
although I found myself adding to the earlier ones as I moved into the 
later ones. In terms of length alone, it soon became 


13 



14 


Jane Roberts 


obviously impossible to write all of the material for any piece on the 
date given. Even by going back over them, however, I couldn't discuss 
everything I wanted to: The essays could have easily grown into a book 
of their own. This weaving things together to make them "fit" is only 
natural for one of my temperament, but I didn't alter any of my original 
copy — that I'd have refused to do — and I kept intact those first 
spontaneous descriptions of the events attendant to Jane's physical 
difficulties, as well as our deep-seated, sometimes wrenching feelings 
connected to them. I did not look at Seth-Jane's Dreams itself while 
writing the essays, in order to avoid having them overly influenced by 
work in the book. Instead, we want all of this preliminary material to 
show how we live daily — regardless of how well we may or may not do 
— with a generalized knowledge of, and belief in, the Seth material. 

Seth, then, has finished his work on Dreams. I wrote the original 
version of the notes for each book session as he delivered it through 
Jane, and also began collecting other notes and reference material that 
might be used. Since I've completed the essays, all I have to do now is 
"refine" the session notes (and addenda) as I type the finished 
manuscript. Jane will help as much as she can. We expect to have the 
book ready for our editors, Tam Mossman and Lynne Lumsden, by the 
end of the year. 

Jane appreciates that the dates I'm always giving merely furnish a 
convenient framework for our material, but she's hardly enamored of 
such precise methodology; she understands that it's my way of doing 
things, realizes it's very useful, and goes on from there. I use a similar 
system in presenting all of the published Seth material. It has the great 
attribute of allowing for quick reference timewise (if not always by 
subject matter) to any of the more than 1,500 regular, private or deleted, 
and "ESP class" sessions Jane has given over the past 19 years — until 
July 1982, that is, when I began work on these passages. 

Moreover, the choice of presenting the material in essay form proved 
to have one virtue that was more valuable than all the others combined: 
It allowed us to delve into the events I describe, and "our deep-seated, 
sometimes wrenching feelings connected to them," a little bit at a time. 
Those situations might have been too devastating for us otherwise, too 
emotionally 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


15 


threatening, too charged for us to present them with at least the 
minimum amount of objectivity required by the written word. Many of 
the events and feelings evoked such deep implications of trial and 
challenge for Jane and me that we were often left with strong feelings 
of unreality: This can't be happening to us. At our ages (52 and 62, Jane 
and I, respectively), why have we created lives with such nightmarish 
connotations? Why do I have to leave my dear wife alone in the 
hospital each night, so that I feel like crying for her when I go to bed by 
myself in the hill house? Why can't we be left alone to live lives of 
peace and creativity? And how many millions and millions of times 
through the ages have other human beings on this planet felt the same 
way — and will yet? Why are our lives ending like this, when we feel 
that simply getting through each day is an accomplishment? 

That basic impetus toward survival came to take precedence over 
everything else. Indeed, for several weeks following the initiation of the 
challenges I relate in the essays, supposedly creative activities like 
writing books and painting pictures often faded into insignificance by 
comparison. And for me, Jane's condition came to stand for everything 
we don't know in our particular joint, chosen, probable earthly reality. 

Yet, Jane and I were being creative with it all — the whole time — and 
moving several stages closer to understanding All That Is in the process. 
If we were often badly frightened, we also felt surges of grim elation 
(when we allowed them to surface) that we were survivors. We'd 
chosen the entire experience, which is still continuing, of course. "You 
make your own reality," Seth has told us innumerable times. We agree 
— and that is where Jane and I diverge most sharply from the 
conventional establishment belief that events happen to people, instead 
of being created by them. 

The essay form gave us chances for at least a minimal study of the 
various forms our creative learning experiences have taken to date. We 
quickly agreed that we'd been setting up the illness syndrome for years, 
yet the deep emotional shocks accompanying its physical developments 
seemed to come at us like attacking dark birds zooming in from another 
probable reality. We learned. We adjusted in ways that a few weeks 
previously would have seemed unbelievable to us — and, ironically, as 
must often happen in such situations, once we'd moved into our new 



16 


Jane Roberts 


joint reality, it appeared that those particular challenges had always 
been incipient for us. 

The essays contain many insights into the meanings the whole 
experience with illness has had for us, and will continue to have for 
many years. Our lives have been irrevocably changed — by choice — and 
not for the worse, either. Jane and I used our wills to intensify our 
focuses in certain areas. And I'm sure that as the reader works his or her 
way through the essays, it will become quite apparent that I wrote them 
just as much for Jane and me as I did for others — all in our ceaseless 
attempts to better understand, to grasp a bit more firmly, those mental 
and physical adventures that we're trying to delve into "this time 
around." 


ESSAY 1 

Thursday, April 1, 1982 

"Let my soul find shelter elsewhere." 

That evocative, prophetic line is from a Sumari song that Jane sang to 
herself a few days before she went into an Elmira, New York, hospital 
on February 26, 1982. Sumari is a "language" she can speak or sing 
while in trance, and which she can translate into English if and when 
she wants to. She recorded her brief song in a sad, low-pitched, 
quavering voice that was like none I'd heard her use before. Its 
indescribable depth of feeling was remarkably prescient in light of the 
events in our lives that preceded — and then followed — the hospital 
experience that affected us so much. 

Indeed, I didn't learn that Jane had made the tape until five weeks 
later, after she'd returned to our hill house from the hospital: I found it 
on March 30, amid others in her writing room. She hadn't labeled it, 
and I began to play it out of curiosity. The song's mournful tones swam 
heavily in the room. It reminded me at once of a dirge or an elegy, and I 
felt chills as I began to intuitively understand just how meaningful it 
was, even without any translation at all. 

"Let my soul find shelter elsewhere," Jane said, by way of a quick 
translation when I played the tape for her a few mi nutes later. It was 
midaftemoon on a cold day. She sat bundled up in 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


17 


her chair in the living room, her head down as she listened. I asked her 
for more on the song's interpretation, but she just repeated that line. She 
roused herself enough to stubbornly maintain that she'd give me more 
later. I knew at once that the tape's contents were so revealing of her 
feelings about her illness, so disturbing and frightening, that she 
couldn't bring herself to explore those deep emotions at that time. I also 
knew that my wife feared the effect of the message upon me — for what 
could the phrase she'd already given me mean, except that her soul had 
at least considered the possibility of leaving her physical body, perhaps 
to find shelter in a nonphysical realm? I accepted her reactions, and 
could only wait in some frustration as I began work on other parts of 
this essay. 

As the days passed Jane kept putting me off about doing the 
translation, until finally I grew resentful and despairing at her refusal to 
cooperate. I decided to write around that one great line as best I could. 
For by then I knew that she had no intention of producing an English 
version: Some childlike and naive, yet deeply stubborn portion of her 
psyche, some "perverse area," as Seth, her trance personality, jokingly 
characterized it long ago, had simply taken over and decided not to do 
any more on that subject. For its own reasons it didn't want to, and that 
was it. I'd seen Jane operate in that fashion before, and I knew she'd 
have her way. 

Fest I give an inaccurate picture of my wife, however, let me add that 
she combines instances of that seeming intransigence with a profound 
intuitive innocence before nature (and thus All That Is), and with a 
great literal acceptance of nature's manifestations and of her own being 
and creations within that framework. Although she's not entirely in 
agreement with me on this point, I think that essentially Jane is a mystic 
— not an easy thing to be in our extroverted, materialistic society, for it 
represents a way of life that's little understood these days. It's a role 
she's chosen for many reasons. Mysticism is still overwhelmingly re- 
garded as a profoundly religious expression, and one that's hardly 
practical, but in my opinion neither of those situations applies to Jane. 
Her "mystical way" is reinforced by a strongly secretive characteristic 
that's usually belied by her seemingly outgoing character and behavior. 
It took me a long time to realize this. I also had to leam that her literal 
cast of mind grows di- 



18 


Jane Roberts 


rectly out of her mysticism, and that because it does, she can be quite 
impulsive. There's nothing halfway about Jane. She's intensely loyal. 
She's a very perceptive person with many abilities, a fine intelligence, 
and an excellent critical sense. Whatever reservations she shows — her 
conscious inhibition of impulses, for example — are learned devices that 
are literally protective in nature. I've certainly found her particular 
combination of attributes to be unique, and I don't think she'd be able to 
express the Seth material as she does without them. Throughout these 
essays I hope to add many insights into her character. For now, though, 
I present what I have to work with from the saddest, most mournful 
Sumari song she's ever created and sung. The tape goes into our files, 
although I'd love to know what she said on the rest of it. . . . 

In the meantime, two days after I discovered the tape, I asked Jane, 
"Do you want to have a session tonight?" 

At first she didn't know. The question followed the little talk we'd had 
after supper. My back hurt somewhat. I'd finally decided that the ache 
wasn't because I'd been lifting her physically — all 82 pounds of her — 
but because of the medical bills we'd received today. (That had been my 
somewhat amused speculation to begin with.) We've gotten a Hurry — a 
small blizzard — of bills from doctors during the last few days. 

Jane has been home from the hospital since last Sunday, March 28. 
She spent 3 1 days there, being treated for a severely underactive thyroid 
gland (hypothyroidism), protruding eyes and double vision, an almost 
total hearing loss, a slight anemia, and budding bedsores, or decubitus 
ulcers. Several of the ulcers had been incipient for a number of months, 
although neither of us had realized what those circles of reddening flesh 
meant as they slowly blossomed on the "pressure points" of her 
buttocks, coccyx, and right shoulder blade. Decubitus ulcers: one of the 
first terms we'd added to our rapidly growing medical vocabulary — and 
one of the more stubborn afflictions for a human being to get rid of 
once they've become established. Even now not all of Jane's decubiti 
have fully healed, although several of them have closed up nicely. 

I should note, by the way, that her bedsores weren't infected when 
she went into the hospital, but were less than a week later. How come? 
"It's staph," several of the nurses told us. A sign 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


warning of infection was put on the door of 3B9, Jane's room, and 
stayed there until she went home. "If the infection in that ulcer on your 
coccyx reaches the bone, it means at least a six-week stay in the 
hospital," exclaimed Jane's principal doctor, Rita Mandali (not her real 
name). Twice-daily treatments with hydrogen peroxide and a 
sulfadiazine cream were started. And I began to read up on how many 
kinds of staphylococcus bacteria alone there are, and indeed how 
common infections are in hospitals, since by their very nature those 
institutions are far from being the cleanest in town. . . . 

Jane's hearing is much improved after treatment with decongestants 
and a pair of minor operations in which tiny drainage tubes were 
inserted through her eardrums — the procedure is called surery — to 
relieve internal blockage. Jane's thyroid gland, Dr. Mandali finally told 
her, has simply ceased functioning, so the doctor has begun a program 
of cautiously rejuvenating my wife's endocrine system, and thus all of 
her bodily processes, with a synthetic thyroid hormone in pill form (a 
low 50 micrograms to start). Jane is to take these pills for the rest of her 
life. At least that's the current prognosis. Her double vision is not as 
severe and is supposed to keep improving as the hormone takes effect. 
Dr. Mandali has prescribed drops to keep Jane's eyes lubricated, and a 
liquid salicylate medication (as a substitute for aspirin) to control joint 
pain and inflammation. Both of these products are taken four times a 
day. The increased glandular activity is also expected to have some 
beneficial effects upon Jane's arthritis, and possibly upon her anemia (a 
condition that often accompanies arthritis). I asked that she be tested for 
food allergies, since I'd read that reactions to various foods and addi- 
tives can trigger arthritis, but Dr. Mandali said that "if Jane is allergic 
she (Jane) would know it" — a position I came to most thoroughly 
disagree with. But usually, I thought, the trouble with having something 
diagnosed as rheumatoid arthritis is that not only do you have it when 
you go into the hospital, but when you leave it. Such is the state of the 
art of medicine in this case, unfortunately. 

Because of her much-reduced thyroid activity, Jane often dozes or 
even sleeps in her chair. She'd very gradually started doing this before 
entering the hospital, but any physical causes behind her behavior had 
been unsuspected by us then. I only 



20 


Jane Roberts 


saw that she could use the rest, since she obviously didn't feel well 
generally — but I also thought she was waiting for one of her 
characteristic surges of creative energy before digging into her next 
book (of which she always has several going). Our agreement was that 
in the meantime she was to start checking the sessions and my notes for 
Dreams; then I was to type the final manuscript. Jane never reached her 
goal, however. Instead she napped or drifted — even as she does now — 
while intermittently reading and rereading our material for Dreams 
without ever doing anything with it. 

She hadn't dozed quite as much in the hospital, for there she'd been 
roused by much more constant stimuli. And now, we just have to wait 
an u nk nown number of weeks or months for the thyroid treatment to 
rejuvenate her vitality. At the moment it seems that Jane uses her 
available energy for the main task at hand. If she's just eaten, for 
example, her body focuses its resources upon digestion, with perhaps 
conscious lapses resulting. During other longer periods, say, those 
resources may direct themselves toward healing or dreaming — or 
possibly both. 

After some hesitation following my question about having a session 
this evening, Jane decided she wanted to contribute introductory 
material for Dreams. This was to be a new experience for us: Because 
of the arthritis she was having trouble even holding a pen, so she 
intended to dictate her material as though she were writing it herself in 
longhand. I was to take it down for her. This wasn't to be Seth speaking. 
For Jane's own work, however, I note times, occasional pauses, and any 
other information in italics, just as I do for Seth's dictation. 

(7:10 p.m. Thursday, April 1, 1982. Once she began dictation, Jane's 
pace was good. In fact, I had to write very rapidly, for I didn 't want to 
ask her to slow down during this initial experiment.) 

Seth uses the term "value fulfillment," as in the title of this 
book, to imply life's greater values and characteristics — that is, 
we are alive not only to continue, to insure life's existence, but 
to add to the very quality of life itself. 

We do not just receive the torch of life and pass it on as one 
Olympic runner does to another, but we each add to that living 
torch or flame a power, a meaning, a quality that is uniquely our 
own. We do this as individuals, as members of the family, the 
community, and members of the species. Whenever that flame shows 
signs of dimming, of losing 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


21 


rather than gaining potential energy and desire, then danger signals 
appear everywhere. They show up as wars and social disorders on 
national scales, and as household crises, as illnesses (pause), as 
calamities on personal levels as well. 

In Dreams, "Evolution, " and Value Fulfillment Seth outlines the 
great cosmic and private energies that in our terms once brought into 
existence the reality of the universe and the birth of those private, 
cohesive realities in which our own individual daily lives are couched. 

(7:20.) It is impossible in our time scheme to intellectually know our 
own potentials without trying them out, without testing them against 
the world's edges. We must activate our impulses and desires, try out 
our abilities, seek out our strengths by joyfully advancing into the 
given world of physical energy, physical time and space. In the 
development of each individual we act and reenact the startling events 
that brought our own universe into existence. The universe was not 
created in some dim past, but is newly recreated by our own thoughts, 
dreams, and desires — so that reality happens at all possible levels at 
once. And in that living endeavor we each play our part. 

When we hesitate, hold back, falter, when we hold back energy in 
the hopes of saving it, when we allow fear rather than trust to guide 
our activities, when the quality of our lives becomes less than we 
know it should be — then warnings flash. (Long pause.) One crisis 
after another may arise to gain our attention. This has happened in 
many people's lives — and so recently the same kind of warning 
recently appeared in my own life. 

(7:35.) As I write this Introduction I am recovering from a group of 
illnesses, recuperating from a month's stay in the hospital, and now 
I'm trying to see where my personal situation fits into Seth's larger 
views. That is, the individual is not just a side issue in what people 
usually call the evolutionary process — but he or she is the entire issue, 
without which there would be no species, no survival, no exquisite 
web of genetic cooperation to produce living creatures of any kind 
whatsoever. 

("Well, I need a cigarette, "Jane abruptly said at 7:36. 

"You did terrifically, hon, " I exclaimed, patting her on a knee. 
"Terrific. " 

"Yeah, I knew I got it — thank God, "she replied. Then we sat quietly 
side by side at the round card table we'd placed at one end of 



22 


Jane Roberts 


our buttered old couch in the living room. In a far comer a sitcom 
rerun played on the large-screen television set. I'd turned off the 
sound before the session began. The whole room was bathed in a 
friendly, subdued yellow light. A rather strong northerly wind 
periodically rattled the house's metal blinds. The whole creative 
intimacy of our hill house was one that we'd enjoyed many times; we 
desperately wanted to return to that same ambience many more times. 

"Well, I don 't know — maybe that's all I can do tonight, " Jane 
finally said, with a bit of an embarrassed grin. "It's hard for me to get 
into the next part. ..." But then at 7:45:) 

In our other books I'd mentioned my physical symptoms now and 
then. By the time Seth finished dictating Dreams last month (on 
February 8), however, my physical condition had deteriorated. Two 
weeks later I could hardly get out of my chair onto the couch or the 
bed. After answering approximately 50 letters one weekend, the next 
weekend I could barely hold a pen to write my name. Soon afterward 
my hearing began to fade, then suddenly became blocked. A few days 
later I wound up in the emergency room of one of our local hospitals 
— and there, all too quickly I became familiar with the medical 
profession's battery of testing paraphernalia. ( Long pause.) I was 
placed in a CAT scanner, my bare backside pressed painfully against 
a cold metal table, my head encircled by the strange doughnut, or 
globe, while bright white lights and numbers, it seemed, flashed 
everywhere. They only X-rayed my head. 

(Jane meant, of course, a CT or computerized tomography 
scanner, a modern X-ray machine that shows the interior of the body in 
a series of brilliant cross-sectional images.) 

(With a laugh at 7:51:) Later that same bare backside, thin and bony, 
was pressed against another metal table, while this time electrodes 
were attached to every available area of my head so that an 
electroencephalogram could be taken. No instructions were given to 
me except to close my eyes as the test progressed. (Pause.) Some 
kind of white gum, or glue, had been rubbed into my scalp through 
my hair to improve the electrical contacts, and when the test was 
finished the attendant simply grabbed one area of the equipment and 
pulled the entire mess off my head in one motion — which felt like my 
entire scalp was coming off. The obvious unconcern on the part of 
that middle-aged female attendant made me furious. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


23 


"Value fulfillment?" I thought. "What the hell am I letting myself 
in for? And how have the events of my life come to such a turn?" This 
was, of course, as anyone familiar with hospitals knows, only the 
beginning. There were numberless blood tests. I also had to be lifted 
onto and off the bed, onto and off the portable commode. 

(Pause at 8:05.) My 82 pounds of flesh were hauled, dragged, pulled, 
and stretched by good-natured but often impatient strangers — nurses 
and orderlies and aides — and the most private of my physical 
processes became a matter of public record. What a shocker! 

("See, I never know how much to put in these intros, "Jane said. "So 
many different kinds of people read the books — " 

"Just do it your own way, " I said. "The hell with it. There's 
nothing else you can do. ") 

I remember when I had my first bowel movement at the hospital. 
Eyes closed to hold back tears of humiliation, I felt my arms lifted by 
an orderly (long pause), my thin belly and ribs straining in the 
brightly lit room, my backside lifted and supported by two other 
strange arms, while a third person — I don't want to sound too vulgar 


(8:12. "Forget it," I said. "We'll fix it if necessary.") 

— wiped away the results of the three strong doses of prune juice I'd 
been given. Yet there was, I knew, a fellowship even in those 
processes — one that I had perhaps too long ignored: the quality of 
fellowship, as a species or a family or a community comes together to 
help one of its own kind. And as I was to see, even for all of the 
pessimistic suggestions of medical science itself, in the very middle of 
crisis there was a certain indisputable sense of cooperation — a 
"vulgar" physical optimism, and a kind of humor that I had long 
forgotten existed. 

(8:21.) In this book, Seth does discuss to some degree the nature of 
certain illnesses as they apply to individual life and genetic survival. 
And there I lay in the hospital for a full month, with physical survival 
uppermost in my mind — hardly a coincidence. They told me that my 
thyroid gland was very underactive, and that I had arthritis. They X- 
rayed my hands but not my knees. One of the blood tests showed that 
I was slightly anemic. But other tests and X-rays revealed that I had 
sound lungs — in spite of my smoking — a good heart and stomach and 
other organs. I laughed. 



Jane Roberts 


(Long pause at 8:22. 1 thought Jane was tiring. She might have 
added that she also laughed because neither did she have a brain 
tumor, cancer, vasculitis [an inflammation of the blood vessels], or 
any of several other diseases the doctors thought might be present. 

She felt she'd beaten a number of negative suggestions from medical 
personnel in connection with all of those afflictions.) 

I liked practically all of the doctors and nurses and orderlies, and 
they liked me. Most of them didn't know or care "who I was." Very 
few were familiar with my work (although a few local fans — 
strangers — eventually found their way to my hospital room). I found 
I could hold my own in that environment that at first had seemed so 
alien. I learned to joke even as my backside swung perilously above 
the commode, while I hoped that its aim was true in the hands of the 
nurses and orderlies — and again I felt that long-forgotten 
camaraderie with people, and a growth within myself apart from my 
work, or what I did. I had a right to be on earth because I'd been bom 
here like every other physical creature, and on that level alone I was 
part of a great framework of physical energy and cooperation. 

(8:31 P.M. "Well, that's all for now, "Jane said after a long pause. "I 
sure am surprised I did that much. I didn 't know I could do it — 
especially that way. ... I'd never have tried it if you hadn't suggested 
it. " 

Jane hadn't dictated this material while in a trance or a dissociated 
state, as she does when producing her Seth material. She hadn't felt 
particularly inspired, nor at all sure how to proceed. It was just that 
she's always used longhand or a typewriter for her own work, she said, 
and never dictated it, as many writers do these days. Just the same, 
her creative abilities had immediately come to her aid.) 


This is a good place to explain that while Jane was in the hospital neither of 
us ever made any attempt to "convert" the people there — doctors, nurses, 
technicians, say — to a belief in the Seth material. Beyond saying that Jane was 
a writer and that I was an artist, we told no one of our interests in life. We 
weren't there to impose our beliefs upon anyone else. We'd made the 
conscious, joint decision during a time of crisis to seek certain kinds of help 
from skilled practitioners in the medical field, and we were willing to leam 
from them, even if those people were pretty certain to have belief systems very 
different from ours. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


25 


(Well, I should add with a touch of a smile, at least we were more 
willing to leam in the beginning!) 

Jane and I didn't know whether the doctors we did business with 
even knew what a trance state was. I envisioned some hilarious 
episodes during which Seth, speaking through Jane, would try to 
explain to gatherings of medical people just who he was and what he 
believed. Next, he'd go into what Jane and I believed, and why. Then 
he'd add some very pungent remarks as to what those in his audiences 
believed, and why. . . . 

Joking aside, though, after her month in the hospital Jane and I ended 
up with a collection of medical experiences that were mixed at best — 
positive and negative — and most expensive indeed. 


ESSAY 2 

Monday, April 5, 1982 

(7:15 P.M. Our next "Jane session" took place four days later, on the 
date shown above. Once again we sat at the card table in the living 
room. And once again Jane wavered at times between waking and 
dozing. When she did begin dictation, though, her pace was good.) 

In later years it's become impossible for me to close my eyes 
to the multiple pressing differences that exist between Seth's 
explanation of the nature of reality, and of our own private 
experience of it. In this book, Dreams, "Evolution, " and Value 
Fulfillment, for example, Seth portrays us as a vibrant, well- 
intended species — a physically attuned kind of consciousness 
beautifully tailored by our own cosmic ingredients to live lives 
of productivity, of spiritual and physical enjoyments, with each 
individual life in charge of its own fate and adding to the 
potentials of all other life as well. 

Yet, I read all of those dire newspaper stories predicting 
disaster, and (oh yes, dear readers) I watched the daily tragic- 
news events dramatized in living color on our television screen. 
But more than that, I've seen in my own life the steady 
accumulation of physical symptoms. 

If life has such great potentials, as Seth maintains, if it 



26 


Jane Roberts 


began — and begins (and continues to begin) at such rich creative and 
productive levels — then why did our experience so often make it 
seem that we struggled against unknowing or uncaring cosmic 
forces, or that we were at the most so ignorant of our own source and 
creativity that our hands were tied, or that we were forever shut off 
from our natural heritage? 

There was no doubt that we'd been reading ourselves "wrong." 

There was no doubt as far as I was concerned that every one of our 
standard explanations for life (pause) were relatively useless now, 
regardless of how much they might have helped or hindered us in the 
past. 

(Long pause at 7:51.) It began to strike me that even my own 
physical incapacities were indeed creative ventures that appeared in 
my experience as bad, or limiting, or even tragic. Perhaps they were 
instead efforts on the part of my own explorations of value 
fulfillment to reorganize my life's vast energies. But instead of facing 
up to a considerable change in life-style, I panicked and felt myself 
to be almost assaulted, forced into a life that offered less and less 
physical freedom. So again, how did that experience fit into Seth's 
Dreams, "Evolution, " and Value Fulfillment} 

As far as I can see, I've been living with two sets of "facts" for 
some years. The old established explanations had faltered, and finally 
seemed almost incomprehensible, while the new explanations of Seth 
seemed beyond my reach, at least in certain areas — areas that were 
vital to physical and psychic peace. The same processes appeared in 
my husband Rob's life, of course, as our lives seemed to impinge into 
the area of man's greatest hopes, and into the opposite area of his 
greatest fears. 

(8:02 p.m. "Oh, that's all, "Jane suddenly said. Her delivery this 
evening had been as fast as that of last time, yet more subdued. Her 
voiced had carried the same tremor. She was tired, and I was far from 
being at my best as I fought off a half-repressed cough — an affliction 
that seldom troubles me.) 

Yesterday, Sunday, had marked the end of Jane's first week home from the 
hospital. We'd found it to be an exceedingly difficult one for a number of 
reasons. "The toughest week of our twenty-seven years together," I told a 
neighbor last night. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


27 


To see my wonderful, lovely wife so reduced to her present near- 
helpless state was almost more than I could bear. Jane herself was 
displaying a stoicism (I'm afraid to write "acceptance") regarding her 
condition that I'd have found unendurable were I the one experiencing 
it. I reacted very badly at times, I'm afraid, alternating profound moods 
of despair with those of great tenderness, love, and compassion. I 
wanted to cry and could not. With a more painful heart I yearned for my 
wife to walk to me, hips innocently and joyfully swaying, as she used to 
do years ago, when she'd meet me every day as I left the printing 
company where I worked as a commercial artist. That had been shortly 
after we married, in 1954. We were living in Sayre, Pennsylvania, a 
middle-class railroad town in which I'd grown up, which lies only 18 
miles southeast of our present home in Elmira, New York. Not that I 
wanted Jane to be magically transformed into a 25-year-old again — just 
that I ached to see a resurgence of that uninhibited, unplanned joy of 
motion for its own sake. For now I understood that freedom of motion 
was at least one true reflection of an individual's creative potential. 

Our week just past had been filled with a desperate energy as we 
struggled to get settled so that we could return to "work" — to our arts 
— on some sort of a regular basis. To our dismay, we discovered that 
Jane had lost much of the use of her legs while in the hospital, since 
during that month she'd been actively discouraged from using them in 
her accustomed way. This complicated enormously all of our efforts to 
help her move about the house as she used to in her office chair, which 
is on rollers, and nearly signaled the failure of our efforts to live by 
ourselves. We'd scheduled just a two-hour visit by a registered nurse 
five afternoons a week for Jane's physical therapy, and to change the 
dressings on her decubiti. Neither of us wanted live-in help on the 
premises 24 hours a day. I, for one, was afraid that such an arrangement 
would not only demonstrate our acceptance of the fact that Jane was 
really caught in a terrible, permanent situation, but that it would end up 
destroying us psychologically and creatively. 

Jane struggled to regain strength in her legs. Without being aware of 
it, I'd begun to lose weight after she was admitted to the hospital, and 
by now my loss had reached the point where others began to notice it. 
Deliberately I began to eat more. I 



28 


Jane Roberts 


became extremely busy after my wife came home, making what seemed 
like endless calls and trips about getting prescriptions filled, about 
trying out various kinds of beds and mattresses and chairs and hospital 
gowns, about insurance, about a commode, about having a speaker 
phone hooked up to our regular phone so that Jane wouldn't have to 
hold the standard bulky handset to her ear. We even had a small remote- 
controlled television set installed in our bedroom so that she could 
watch it, say, when she was restless during the night. When I began 
sleeping on the couch in the living room, where it was quieter and 
darker, we bought a pair of wireless intercoms so that Jane could call 
me from her bed at any time. We also made some rather expensive 
mistakes, buying certain equipment that proved useless to us. 

And amid all of this frenetic activity our painting and writing — those 
activities we'd always regarded as the creative hearts of our lives, the 
very reasons we'd chosen to live on earth this time around — had 
receded into a far distance, so that they'd become like dimly 
remembered dreams, or perhaps actions practiced in probable lives by 
"more fortunate" versions of ourselves. 

We've had no Seth sessions yet, either regular or private. Jane's 
energy still isn't up to where it should be, although the synthetic 
hormone she's taking is helping her considerably. (Dr. Mandali told us 
that the hormone dosage has to be increased very slowly, over a period 
of months, in order to avoid strain upon the heart and the endocrine 
system.) 


ESSAY 3 

Friday, April 16, 1982 

Our days and nights passed in such a kaleidoscope of activity, broken 
by such uneven periods of sleep, that we hardly noticed whether they 
were hot or cold, clear or rainy. The grass began to change color from 
brown to a pale yellow-green. Jane often dozed in her chair in the 
daytime, but woke up during the nights to watch old movies on 
television. During her first weeks home, I seldom slept more than two 
hours at a time: It seemed that I was always getting up to check the 
dressings on her decubiti, to adjust her pillows, to help make her more 
comfortable on the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


29 


motor-driven, pulsating air mattress we'd finally settled upon as the best 
recommended support available. I'd give her a sip of something to drink, and 
massage her legs as she lay on her back with her knees drawn up. (She can't 
straighten out her legs.) I'd sit with her while she had "a few puffs" on a 
cigarette. The nighttime had a sublime sense of timelessness that I'd always 
admired. It surrounded our bedroom — but even as bleary as I often was, I 
became acutely aware of how that serenity could be jarringly compromised by 
the television set, showing programs that contained their own times of day and 
seasons. 

Jane tried to write with her impaired right hand, frustrated again and again 
because she couldn't hold a pen well enough to put down the ideas stirring in 
her mind. At times she used her recorder in an effort to compensate for her lack 
of writing ability, but this left us with the prospect of finding the time to tran- 
scribe the tapes — and so far we haven't done so. (Much of that material is so 
personal that at this time we don't want others involved with it, by the way.) 


(We finally held our first "new" Seth session last Monday evening, on 
April 12. It was short but, as I expected it would be, excellent. We were 
pleased to get it for, as I told Jane, if ever we're to understand all of 
the events in our lives that led to the hospital experience, we must call 
upon every ability at our service. And even though this is a personal 
session, still I think it contains clues that apply to all of us. Jane went 
into trance as easily as ever, but her Seth voice contained the same 
underlying tremor I've noticed on a number of occasions since she's 
returned home. Remember that in the following excerpts Seth — who 
claims to be discarnate — calls Jane by her male "entity name, " Ruburt, 
and thus "he" and "him.") 

For all of your complaining (Seth told us with some humor at 8:56), 
you understand in rather good measure the decisions and actions that 
motivate your lives, so that Ruburt is more than usually aware of the 
manipulations that psychologically and physically lie just beneath the 
material usually carried by what is ordinarily called the conscious 
mind. Therefore, a kind of momentary gap appeared between his life 
and his living of it — a pause and a hesitation became obvious between 
his life and what he should do with it, as his condition showed just 
before the hospital hiatus. 

I will help you still further understand those 



30 


Jane Roberts 


manipulations, for many people — most people — carry on the same 
kind of procedures while making important decisions as to whether 
or not they will continue life at any given time. But they hide the 
issues from themselves far more than Ruburt did. 

( Long pause at 9:05.) Give us a moment. . . . The entire issue had 
been going on for some time, and the argument — the argument being 
somewhat in the nature of a soul facing its own legislature, or 
perhaps standing as a jury before itself, setting its own case in a kind 
of private yet public psychic trial. Life decisions are often made in 
just such a fashion. With Ruburt they carried a psychic and physical 
logic and economy, being obvious at so many different levels of 
actuality. In such a way buried issues were forced into the light, 
feared weaknesses and inadequacies were actively played out where 
they could be properly addressed, assorted, and assessed. To 
whatever degree possible, given your time requirements, I will try to 
explain such matters. 

(9:10.) To such a degree, of course, the affair was, then, therapeutic. 
Ruburt is now far more willing to make certain changes in his life 
than he was earlier, and he sees himself more as one of a living 
congregation of creatures — less isolated than before, stripped down 
from the superperfect (subconscious) model, and therefore no more 
under the compulsion to live up to such a psychological bondage. 

(All delivered with considerable emphasis.) 

He (Ruburt) need not try to be the perfect self, then, the 
superimage — and in fact to some extent he found himself the 
supplicative [self], knocking upon creaturehood's earthly door, as 
any creature who found himself wounded through misadventure 
might ask aid from another. He found a mixed world, one hardly 
black or white, one with some considerable give-and-take, in which 
under even the most regrettable of circumstances there was room for 
some action, some improvement, for some . . . creative response. The 
rules of the game have therefore been automatically altered. The 
issues are clearer, dramatically etched. 

(9:18.) The arthritis situation is as I gave it (in a number of private 
sessions), but you are still faced with the medical interpretation of 
that situation, so that it is up to Ruburt to set it aside. He is returning 
to activity at his creative, 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


naturally therapeutic pace, no longer afraid that he is going too fast 
— or will — hut shown only too clearly that activity and motion 
represent the only safe, sane, and creative response [to life's 
challenges]. 

We do not want long drawn-out discussions of why and what 
exactly happened, simply to understand the dynamics of the activity. 
Ruburt can work with the self-image he has now. It is imperfect, but 
it is pliable and willing to change. 

There will be more. This is to give you a starter — and as always 
my heartiest regards to you both. 

("Thank you very much, Seth. Good night. ") 

(9:25 p.m. Jane's pace had generally been okay, considering the 
circumstances. "I felt like when I got slow there a couple oj times that 
it didn 't have anything to do with dozing off, " she said, referring to a 
few longer pauses. "They were just normal things. ..." I told her 
she'd done well. "But I really got worried tonight, when I started 
drifting like that before the session, " she added. 

We were very pleased with the session. It contains a number of 
important clues. The arthritis diagnosis, Jane said, was the only one 
the medical profession could offer, given its insights arid viewpoints 
— but after all those years would she be able "to set it aside"? Seth 
has insisted all along that she doesn't have arthritis per se. Instead, 
according to him, Jane adopted her physical immobility as a form of 
protection against going too far, too fast, with her unique abilities. 
Yet she also used her "symptoms" to intensify her focus upon those 
abilities, and to reinforce the strongly secretive aspects of both of our 
natures. I must add, however, that these three statements represent 
great simplifications of very complex psychological phenomena. 

Equally important is Seth 's suggestion that Jane no longer needs 
"to try to be the perfect self," even on an unconscious basis. And, 
frankly, I want a good amount of additional material— from Jane 
and from Seth — on her progress in resolving her deliberations on the 
merits of continuing physical life. 

Actually, I was amazed at the opacity of my perception: It seemed 
that once again I was just beginning to understand that Jane had 
chosen to embark upon a journey in which she would explore herself 
and the world in intensely physical and emotional terms — in contrast 
to the more intellectual ways by which she and I have usually 
conducted our searches, through the Seth material and our own 
inquiring minds. ... I was frightened by her resolve, and by my own 
acquiescent participation in such a plan. And why, I wondered, did 
most of us, most of the time, buy our new experience and knowledge 
at such high prices?) 



32 


Jane Roberts 


(9:30 a.m. Friday, April 16, 1982. Seth-fane came through with that 
little session five days ago. One might say that this morning Jane 
continued it in her own session, exploring especially Seth's opening 
material. At first she tried to do it as best she could through writing: 
Painfully, holding her pen awkwardly, she spent over an hour 
recording the first four paragraphs — even then, after checking our 
records, I added to her work material about dates and sequences.) 

So, one thing I know: I'm a far different person now as I write this 
Introduction than I was when Seth dictated the book. And as he 
spoke of the beginnings of the world, I began to play with the idea of 
quietly ending my own private sphere of existence. Not through a 
violent suicide, but through a half-calculated general retreat. 

Few overt hints of this appear in Rob’s notes for Dreams. For one 
thing, the process of withdrawal was slow at the start. For another, 
when Seth was more than three-quarters of the way through Dreams 
he began devoting a series of private sessions to an in-depth 
discussion of "the magical approach" — material that was calculated 
to help me personally, and others like me, change our approach to 
experience and thus experience itself. Rob's detailed notes about my 
physical condition, then, appear in those pages. 

All of that work — and more — accounts for the long delay in the 
completion of Dreams, "Evolution, " and Value Fulfillment. Actually, 
with the exception of one session held in November 1980, 1 let my 
work on the book go for over 13 months, from early June 1980 to 
mid- July 1981. 

We might have inserted some of this introductory material into 
that large gap in Dreams, since very important portions of it were 
acquired during that time, but we didn't want to interrupt the sessions 
for the book with different subject matter. We decided to outline our 
story here instead, and to carry it through the hospital experience, 
since that was its logical outcome. Rob also wants this material 
presented as a unit so that it can serve as a foundation for future 
books we're already discussing, and I agree with his decision. 

(11:30. Finally I began writing down Jane's words as I'd done 
before. Very unusual, by the way — her coming through with 
dictation from whatever source this early in the day.) 

Indeed, Seth's material on the magical approach was so 
fascinating that by the time he finished Dreams I'd already 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


33 


put together large portions of it in a separate book, even if much of it 
was personal. Not only that, but those "magical" sessions had 
naturally developed into another series, this time-on a portion of the 
personality Seth called "the sinful self' — mine as well as that of 
others — and those sessions had in turn led me to produce many pages 
of material directly from my own sinful self. That great personal 
revelation took place in June 1981. Ironically, then, in the midst of my 
own half-conscious withdrawal I'd been giving birth to not only Seth's 
Dreams, but several other intriguing long-range concepts. And even if 
all of those sessions had been bom out of my own psychic and 
psychological challenges and dilemmas, I knew they were excellent 
and deserved publication. 

I could feel Rob hoping that my own efforts would help me. In a 
hundred ways he tried his best to help me on his own. Seth resumed 
work on Dreams during that July, but each day I seemed to work less 
and less. Summer turned into fall, then winter, and I hardly noticed. I 
began to doze in my chair as I sat at my desk. On occasion I was 
consciously-aware of thinking how easy it might be on certain levels 
to let my desires drop one by one — there seemed to be few left in any 
case — and to let myself simply drift off into an unastonished death. 

That is, I thought it could all happen so easily and naturally 
and painlessly that there would be no one point where you could 
say, "Now she lives and now she doesn't." 

Maybe I'd produced all I was meant to. Maybe the fire of my life 
was coming to its own natural conclusion. Why try to fan it into life 
again, particularly- if its initial joy had forever vanished? Maybe that 
course was better than the determination and painful discomforts that 
might be necessary to prolong lifely existence. So I was to some 
extent only half alarmed to hear from some strange inner existence my 
own voice slow down. Tremors appeared in it, as if the vowels and 
symbols had endless gaps — uneven edges — and some part of me was 
escaping like smoke even between my words. 

(11:35. "Let me relax for a minute, "Jane said. Her pace had been 
fast. Then more slowly:) 

My hearing began to fail, at first gradually. Let people talk around 
me, I thought: I no longer cared. Then with 



34 


Jane Roberts 


bewildering impact I found myself one day almost entirely deaf. Here 
was no gentle lulling silence, for the absence of sound frightened 
me beyond anything I could remember. (Long pause.) Was Rob in the 
room? If I couldn't see him I couldn't tell. Did he stand protectively 
just behind my chair, ready to help me in my maneuvers into bed, or 
was he in the kitchen, rooms away? There were no sounds of 
footsteps upon the carpeted floors, no telltale hint of activity. The 
experience interrupted my retreat. I remember somehow equating all 
the silence about me with a forbidding white wall. And in 
parentheses: (I don't know why I felt that way, but I did.) I couldn't 
die deaf (Jane said with a laugh at 11:45). I think I had imagined that 
everything would shut down gradually. I certainly hadn't planned on 
one sense suddenly turning off. 

The next few days, in mid-February 1982, found me determined to 
clear up the hearing problem — and on one level at least, it was that 
determination that led me finally to the hospital's emergency room. 

We had no family doctor to call upon, but through the invaluable help 
of a dear friend who was also a nurse, we set up an appointment with 
a doctor at the hospital. 

(11:50 am. We stopped for lunch. Jane had dictated her material just 
as she had on April 1 and 5, without going into trance. And 1 told her 
1 was almost certain that when I went back lo finishing the notes for 
Dreams itself, I'd be adding much personal material to them. She 
didn't object, although I'm sure she would have done so — and 
strenuously — in earlier years.) 

We didn't return to "work," however, until we'd enjoyed a covered-dish 
supper that a loving neighbor had prepared for us. By then our visiting nurse 
had come and gone. I'd run quick errands to the drugstore and the supermarket, 
and written two letters to correspondents explaining that we had no time for 
visitors. There was more than a little irony and humor connected with my 
efforts here, though, for no sooner had I sealed the second letter than there was 
a knock on the front door of the hill house. An unexpected visitor stood there: a 
young woman lawyer who had flown to Elmira from San Francisco to see Jane. 
Although Jane was hardly at her best, she discussed her caller's personal 
problems with her for an hour. I took a nap as soon as the lady left. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


(This evening (on April 16] Jane suggested that we sit at our living- 
room table while I read her morning's dictation to her. But instead: 
"Well, I guess I'll do a Seth thing tonight, "she announed, rather to 
my surprise, "but it won't be long at all. ..." This is the second time 
she's spoken for Seth since leaving the hospital. When she went into 
trance at 7:39 her Seth voice had a distinct tremor — one decidedly 
more pronounced than on April 12 — and a hard-to-define faraway 
quality. She spoke with many long pauses. I think that in the 
following excerpts Seth rather neatly encapsulates her past beliefs, 
her present condition, and how far she has yet to go in meeting her 
challenges. [Not that I'm the innocent bystander in all of this, of 
course. I'm deeply involved.] 

Just as he's done at least a couple of thousand times before, Seth 
opened the session with a certain famous word:) 

Now: The same process involving the thyroid gland has happened 
several times in his (Ruburt's) life, and in each of those cases it has 
repaired itself. 

If earlier, however, Ruburt had the erroneous idea that he was 
going too fast — or would or could — and had to restrain himself and 
exert caution, now he received the medical prognosis, the "physical 
proof' that such was not the case, and in fact that the opposite was 
true: He was too slow. If our words could not convince him, or his 
own understanding grasp the truth, then you had the "truth" uttered 
with all of the medical profession's authority. And if once a doctor 
had told him years ago how excellent was his hearing, the medical 
profession now told him that his slowness (his thyroid deficiency) 
had helped impair his hearing to an alarming degree. 

Moreover, here is the medication necessary — the thyroid 
supplement — that will right that balance. And so it will. 

(Long pause at 7:46.) If Ruburt once found himself imagining that 
he must be strong and perfect enough to help solve everyone else's 
problems, now he found himself relatively helpless and 
"undefended" — that is, his physical condition put him in [such a 
situation]. The superperfect, impractical self-image simply fell 
away. It could not survive such a situation. 

(7:50.) So contrary to its own beliefs, and helpless or not, Ruburt 
was holding his own. . . . 

(7:58.) There was a certain comradeship existing between himself 
and others [in the hospital]. Desires and impulses 



Jane Roberts 


became more immediate, clearer-cut, easier to identify. The 
discomforts of a physical nature led to instant responses. . . . His 
weaknesses were out in the open, dramatically presented, and from 
that point, unless he chose death he could only go forward — for 
suddenly he felt that there was after all some room to move, that 
achievements were possible, where before all accomplishments 
seemed beside the point in the face of his expected superhuman 
activity. 

He will, then, continue to improve, because he has allowed 
himself some room for motion, for change of value fulfillment. Trust 
the body's rhythms as these changes occur, however. Going out in 
the yard (as Jane did this afternoon in a wheelchair, accompanied by 
her nurse) was an excellent case in point, important on practical and 
symbolic levels. 

(Long pause at 8:01.) In a manner of speaking, the sinful self created 
the superhuman self-image that demanded so much, and it encased 
Ruburf s body as if in concrete. Well, that image cracked and 
crumbled in the hospital experience, leaving Ruburt with his more 
native, far more realistic image of himself. It is one he can work 
with. Do, when you can, look over my "magical approach" material. 
Ruburt kept turning down his thermostat, so to speak. Now his 
desires and intents have set it upon a healthy, reasonable setting, and 
the inner processes are automatically activated to bring about the 
normal quickening of his body, as before his intent led to the body's 
automatic slowness. 

Knough for this evening. I bid you a fond good evening — and 
know that you have taken, both of you, important new strides. 

("Good night, Seth, " I said.) 

(8:10 p.m. Jane's Seth voice had grown a little stronger as she 
progressed with the session. We were very encouraged by two key 
points Seth had mentioned: that her thyroid gland had repaired itself 
before — such an event happening now would free her of dependence 
upon medication — and that her sinful seifs superhuman image had 
"cracked and crumbled in the hospital experience. " Those two 
developments could leave her body free to heal itself. [In the first 
essay I wrote that according to her doctor Jane's thyroid gland has 
ceased functioning, and that she has to take a substitute hormone 
daily for the rest of her life. Hut the doctor hadn't expressed any idea 
at all that a thyroid gland could regenerate itself] 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


37 


"/ wonder what you'll be doing six months from now, if Seth's right?" 

/ asked. "The body finally became so desperate to free itself from that 
rigid sinful-self superhuman image that it took itself into the hospital 
for a month — even if it did almost kill itself in order to get there. . . 

. "Jane concurred. And right away she described several occasions when 
she thought her thyroid gland had rather seriously misbehaved. I 
remembered two of them.) 

After the session I began to wonder what Jane's "sinful self' would 
have to say now, in comparison to the material she'ci received from it in 
June 1981. During that fervent bout of activity her sinful self had 
explained and defended its actions most eloquently throughout some 36 
closely handwritten pages. Both of us had been appalled at the 
revelations coming through Jane's pen, even if we did grudgingly admit 
that we understood, intellectually at least, many of the points that self 
made. I'd grown very angry as the material unfolded — angry at that 
portion of Jane's psyche for clinging so tenaciously to such a set of 
beliefs, for whatever reasons, and angry at myself for not understanding 
any better than she did their extent and depth, and just how damaging 
they could be in ordinary terms. I'd also been reminded of material Seth 
himself had given a few weeks earlier, in a very important private 
session on April 16: "Many of Ruburt's beliefs have changed, but the 
core belief in the sinful self has been very stubborn. (To me:) While you 
do not possess it in the same fashion, you are also tainted by it, picking 
up such beliefs from early background, and primarily from your father 
in that regard. . . ." 

It's impossible to present here all of Jane's own material on her sinful 
self — much as I'd like to — but shortly I do want to give portions of the 
first few pages to show readers how experiences from one's very early 
years can sometimes have the most profound effects in later life. As will 
be seen, that material obviously raises as many questions as it answers, 
but right now we can do little more than touch upon the whole affair. 
We have years of work ahead of us as we search for understanding. Cer- 
tainly Jane chose all of her challenges in this life, just as I did, and as 
we believe each person does, but a major concomitant of focusing upon 
certain activities involves how one copes with them (often in close 
cooperation with others) as the years pass: 



38 


Jane Roberts 


What new and original depths of feeling and idea are uncovered, layer 
by layer, what insights, what rebellions, and, yes, what acceptances. . . . 

I could write many windy pages about the mysteries of life, I 
suppose, and how each of us does the best we can, although often we 
may not understand what we're doing; but what I really want to do is 
simply note that in her case, fortunately, and even if she may think she's 
failed in certain major areas of life, Jane has achieved some remarkable 
insights into her own situation (as I have into mine, being her marriage 
partner). She's managed to do this with the help of various portions of 
her own personality, the Seth material, and me. Our hope is that her 
case can help illuminate others. There are reasons — creative reasons — 
why she can't walk now, or write in longhand. We insist upon knowing 
what those reasons are. Some of them were obviously engendered by 
and within Jane's so-called sinful self. What challenges she and I have 
to meet! Once again, let me quote Seth from that private session Jane 
held just a year ago, on April 16, 1981: "Your kind of consciousness, 
relatively speaking, involves some intrinsic difficulties along with 
spectacular potentials. You are learning how to form reality from your 
own beliefs, while having at the same time the freedom to choose those 
beliefs — to chose your mental state in a way that the animals, for 
example, do not. In that larger picture (underlined) there are no errors, 
for each action, pleasant or not, will in its fashion be redeemed, both in 
relationship to itself and ... to a larger picture that the conscious mind 
may not be able presently to perceive." 

Fine. We agree with Seth's overall view, and that a sublime mystery 
is implied — but we also want to achieve as much as we can of that 
redemption now, and on conscious physical and psychological levels. 

One small way in which I wanted to begin that quest was for me to 
teach Jane to write — print, actually — with her left hand, which 
functions much better now than her right one does. I thought this might 
be relatively easy for her to do, since she's often voiced her suspicion 
that she's one of those bom "lefties" who at a very early age were 
forced to begin writing with their right hand. She has yet to do anything 
about my suggestion. (I spoke from my own related experience, since 
as a native righthander I taught myself to print with my left hand just to 
see if I could do it. Now I always do crossword puzzles that way.) 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


39 


At the end of May and early in June 1981 we published two books involving 
years of effort: Seth-Jane's The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events, and 
Jane's The God of Jane: A Psychic Manifesto. I was positive that those volumes 
contained much excellent work. I was also positive that with their publication 
Jane's symptoms — especially her walking difficulties — became considerably 
worse. On the surface at least, it was as though some powerful portion of her 
psyche were exacting a grim compensation for the books' appearance in the 
marketplace. Perhaps, I thought, that portion was creating a physical disability 
that allowed Jane to publish forbidden material while protectively isolating 
herself — and me — from rejection by the physical world. Both of us became 
terribly upset. Our joint lifework teetered upon the edge of a physical disaster. 

It could hardly have been accidental, then, that beginning on June 17, 1981, 
our deep need led to Jane's spontaneous production of her own sinful-self 
material. The way had been illuminated by Seth himself in his private sessions, 
with his discussions of her sinful self and related challenges: Those sessions, 
the publication of the two books, Jane's personal sinful-self material and her 
worsening physical situation, all combined to serve as a complex trigger. Here 
are those promised, very revealing passages. I presented their beginning in the 
notes for Session 931, in Chapter 9 of Dreams. I repeat that material here but 
add considerably more to it. Again, my few insertions are bracketed. 


Statement of the Sinful Self 

I resent the designation unjustly given to me, for if I have believed in 
the phenomenon of sin and sought — apparently too rigidly — to avoid 
it, my intentions and interests always were not the avoidance of sin so 
much as the pursuit of eternal truths; the alliance with universal goals, 
the unity in spirit at least of self, whole self, and universal mind. 
Those goals ignite your creative powers and have (and still do) 
propelled you to explore all categories of existence possible, seeking 
to express those divine mysteries that lie within and behind each 
existence — yours, and mine as well. 

Our explorations involved no secondhand evidence handed down 
by others, but the direct personal encounter of our consciousness and 
being with the vast elements of the unknown — a meeting of the self' 
(human and vulnerable) 



40 


Jane Roberts 


with the psychological realms of gods and eternities; giant realms of 
mind that our nature felt attracted to . . . and [was] uniquely 
equipped to perceive. 

I believed in the soul's survival first of all, and inspired the 
"creative self' to step out as freely as possible even while in my 
heart I [also] believed in the existence of sin and devil. I felt upon 
my heart the heavy unkind mark of Cain, sensing that humanity 
carries (unfairly) the almost indelible strain — the tragic flaw — [of] 
being tinged by sin and ancient iniquities. Thusly I reasoned: If I am 
flawed I must automatically distort even those experiences of the 
soul that seem clearest. I must unwittingly fall into error when I trust 
myself the most, since I share that sinful propensity. Yet despite 
these feelings did I (did we) unswervingly set forward. 

The belief in sin and in the sinful self has been for uncounted 
centuries embedded in man's concepts about himself and God. 
Around those beliefs civilizations evolved and religions orbited. So I 
maintain that I am being unfairly attacked (perhaps that is too strong 
a word) for personally accepting in my own understanding a 
philosophy to which ten millions and more have also succumbed, 
and to which the "wisest" of the species have given their loyalty and 
trust. 

Yet even in our [Jane's] childhood years I yearned to free us from 
such doctrines, to search for alternate explanations, to go where no 
man or woman had gone before, and to venture outside the 
boundaries of all official beliefs. 

And to me this was no play but the main challenge — to discover 
while within one life all life's meaning; to acquire in one life's 
vulnerable swiftness evidence of eternity's breadth and depth, to sniff 
out its extended unknown dimensions. So if in the pursuit of such 
goals I overdid my cautions and overreacted, it certainly was not out 
of malice, but in a well-meaning attempt to protect the creative self 
— to keep a hand of caution on its course lest the centuries of man's 
belief in sin carried a true weight that I shared but could not 
comprehend. 

Easy enough to discard this or that symbol of evil, but suppose all 
such symbols hid some deep truth, and cast some restraining base of 
force that in my ignorance I still did not perceive? For by this time in 
our experience, yours and mine, the creative self was 
rambunctiously rushing forward, 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


41 


despite all the cautionary statements of many ancient and modem 
documents, and our books were being read by millions. 

So the belief in man's sinful nature persisted in my mind, a constant 
reminder of man's ignorance of his own nature. How could I be sure 
that our sight wasn't also distorted; that our "sin" was in not accepting 
sin as a value? Perhaps sin itself contained some value that escaped 
beyond our calculations, still undiscovered. 

So in a fashion [Jane's] physical symptoms became a psychological 
disclaimer, so that in some court of larger values we could not be 
"sued" for leading others astray from entrenched beliefs that we were 
still discarding, while not having any completed structure that would 
allow easy access or safe passage from one "life raft" to the new one 
that we were trying to provide. . . . 

But — it now becomes evident — I was myself tinged not by-sin in a 
metaphysical sense (as I thought I might be), but with a belief in sin 
(itself) that I had not dismissed. Therefore the disclaimer was 
necessary to protect myself and others from any fatal flaw in our work 
— a flaw that sin's blindness made invisible. . . . 


And so on. It all was — and is — great material, and more accurate and 
penetrating than my own ideas as to why some portion of Jane's psyche might 
feel a need for protection from the world, or from another part of herself. 
While profoundly upsetting both of us, the revelations of her sinful self also 
seemed to provide a magical psychological key: the yeamed-for understanding 
that would finally unlock Jane's bent physical body. But it didn't. Nothing did 
— not Seth, with all of his great material on the magical approach, not the 
publication of the new books, not even Jane's own work. The challenge of our 
learning enough to initiate her recovery was still with us during that summer of 
1981. 

And as for books, early in August I returned to our publisher, Prentice-Hall, 
the page proofs Jane had corrected for her book of poetry: If We Live Again: 
Or, Public Magic and Private Love. Ordinarily that event would have 
delighted us, since it meant that before the year was out she'd have another 
work published. Instead, we despaired over her physical condition as the 
weeks 



42 


Jane Roberts 


passed. Just how stubborn could those core beliefs held by her sinful 
self be? Finally, we were left hoping that the sinful seifs very exposure 
through its own material would eventually bring about some physical 
improvement. That didn't happen either. I painted in the mornings, 
searching for a peace of mind that I couldn't obtain in any other way. 
Jane held a few widely scattered sessions for Dreams, and a number of 
private ones as fall came, then winter. Those sessions represented 
largely futile activity, I thought, yet I gladly admitted that each one of 
them was as unique and creative as ever, no matter what its subject. Per- 
versely, beyond taking it down and typing it, I hardly looked at the Seth 
material for days at a time. Finally, early in December 1981 1 told Jane I 
was on the verge of refusing to sit with her for any sessions at all, 
regular or private, for I'd become deeply afraid that the more sessions 
she held the worse she'd get. Again she refused to go into the hospital. 
At this time, Prentice-Hall sent us the first published copies of If We 
Live Again, but as proud as Jane and I are of that book, its appearance 
didn't help her. At our small, annual Christmas Eve party we gave auto- 
graphed copies of the book to close friends — the best presents we could 
offer. After the holidays, though, we saw few friends and no strangers. 

The winter turned into one that seemed to be the longest and coldest 
in years, although while heavy storms raged all around us, our 
immediate area of New York State received surprisingly little snow (a 
fact we were very grateful for!). As Jane had dictated to me in her own 
session for April 1 — the first one presented in these essays — during 
those early weeks of 1982 her walking, writing, and hearing began to 
deteriorate markedly. In late February she was hospitalized. . . . 


ESSAY 4 

Saturday, April 17, 1982 

(7:30 p.m. After supper I told Jane I was going to work on the essays 
for Dreams. Already this morning I'd typed from my notes last night's 
very encouraging private Seth session: " — and know that you have 
taken, both of you, important new strides. "Jane said she'd 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


43 


like to do some more dictation of her own, so I agreed to take down 
that instead. Once again, however, she shied away from translating 
any more of that dirgelike Sumari song she'd sung to herself, and 
recorded, shortly before going into the hospital, I still had only that one 
great line she's interpreted for me in English: "Let my soul find shelter 
elsewhere. " 

I now read to her the last two pages of material Seth had given us 
last night. Jane was nodding in her chair as I finished, and I thought 
she wouldn't be doing any work this evening after all. Yet she roused 
herself: "I've got the first sentence, I guess. " I lit her cigarette for her. 
Her voice was free of tremor and her rate of delivery was a little 
slow.) 

There is no doubt that I was caught between life's contrasts, and 
only too aware of the endless questions that came to mind. On the one 
hand there was the Seth material itself, and Seth's performance in his 
books. 

(Long pause at 7:34.) His ideas had somehow led me to the point 
where the very dimensions of experience should change. As he 
presented them, his concepts dealt with the spontaneous, 
rambunctious powers with which nature was endowed. Seth insisted 
that those powers, followed at least in principle, would raise man's 
estate and fill it with a brilliance and joy in which the old problems of 
the species would largely disappear. 

Certainly our lives and the lives of others have been strongly 
influenced by the Seth material, changed for the better. Certainly our 
comprehensions have deepened as a result — yet in the face of that 
great promise, what was I doing barely able to leave my chair? And if 
spontaneous order was such a vital ingredient in the workings of the 
universe, then what was I doing trying to shut it down in my own 
daily life? 

(Long pause at 7:40.) In the meantime, Rob and I often thought that 
this very book would never be completed. I might decide that I'd 
given enough years and energy to the Seth pursuit. Without making 
any conscious decision, I might simply cease having sessions. (Long 
pause.) I did continue with the sessions, of course. The book is 
finished. I realize more and more that life's experience is played out in 
a framework that stretches between life's contrasts. We live in a world 
slung between our dearest hopes and greatest fears, while seldom 
encountering either in their pure form. 



44 


Jane Roberts 


(7:48. Jane spoke with much emphasis here. As i) on cue, through an 
open front window a quickening breeze stirred the long glass wind 
chimes hanging just inside; their pealing harmony filled the living 
room. The chimes had been sent to us as a gift by fans we've never 

Value fulfillment is the largest issue here, both with Seth's book 
and my own experience, and if I really understood what Seth was 
saying in this book, I would not have needed to undergo such an 
uncomfortable drama in my daily life. 

(Long pause at 7:51.) Our vitality wants to express itself. The whole 
world of nature is an irrepressible, expressible area of expansion. Old 
ideas of the survival of the fittest, conventional evolutionary 
processes, gods and goddesses, cannot hope to explain the "mystery 
of the universe" — but when we use our own abilities gladly and 
freely, we come so close to being what we are that sometimes we 
come close to being what the universe is. Then even our most 
unfortunate escapades, our most sorrowful ventures, are not dead- 
ended, but serve as doorways into a deeper comprehension and a 
more meaningful relationship with the universe of which we are such 
a vital part. 

(7:58. "End of introduction, "Jane abruptly said. "That doesn't mean 
that when you get it all typed up I won 't want to add to it. I just want 
to make sure that my own experience keeps coming back to the book, 
'cause that's what it's for. You could end up with a brief epilogue, 
according to what happens. " 

"I don't know, " I said. "That's too jar away to tell. " "Wait a minute, 
while I see if there's anything else. You can do a frrologue or 
whatever else you want, too. ..." End at 8:01 p.m.) 


ESSAY 5 

Sunday, April 18, 1982 

(9:03 A.M. Lost night Jane had pronounced her work finished on the 
introductory material for Dreams. / hadn't said so, but I'd suspected 
that she had more to say. Then as we went to bed she brought up two 
additional subjects to discuss, for those who would wonder: why we 
hadn't more actively sought medical help in the past 



Dreams, "Evolution, "and Value Fulfillment 


for her physical condition; and the many private, or deleted, sessions 
Seth himself has given for her over the years. 

A third point came up this morning, one we've talked about often 
lately. It concerned the other "Seths" who are revealing themselves 
around the country these days. Later tonight I want to offer a little 
more about this overall development — but people speak for their 
Seths entirely without Jane's permission. Jane is most concerned that 
she and I protect the integrity of the Seth material in its unique and 
original form. 

In fact, all of those topics were so much on Jane's mind that for 
the second time in three days she went to "work" right after 
breakfast. In a firmer voice, then, and following a quick look at the 
Sunday-morning paper:) 

Seth gave so many sessions that were devoted to my own physical 
condition that I finally became embarrassed and confused: The 
sessions were obviously terrific — why couldn't. I put them to more 
practical use? 

I have no idea, of course, what physical state I'd be in if the Seth 
phenomenon hadn't appeared in my life (in late 1963), or if I hadn't 
had those sessions to rely upon. And even in the most private-type 
sessions Seth always wound his material into more public areas, so 
that we have reams of unpublished (and very controversial) material 
dealing with the connections between one's illness and other 
members of the family, community relationships, and with the very 
belief systems that underlie all of human activity. The kinds of 
beliefs we have about people bring about the kinds of illnesses we 
encounter. That is certainly one of Seth's clearest messages. The 
individual is always in a state of change. To name and dignify a 
group of symptoms only brings them further into prominence, and 
offers them another framework for permanency. 

(9:10.) Seth couldn't lead my life for me, of course. He couldn't lead 
other people's lives for them (underlined), either — yet through the 
years 1 began to feel a greater and greater sense of responsibility for 
people with physical problems who wrote requiring Seth's aid, or 
mine. Their needs — and my own — seemed to blot out the great hope 
that Seth could and did offer: the infusion of understanding and 
comprehension that could clear away the old belief patterns that 
held the individual in bounds. 

Since the later 1960s, when my own troubles began, I stubbornly 
resisted medical assistance. If I had broken a leg 



Jane Roberts 


I would have gone to a doctor to get it set. I felt that I could handle 
my particular kind of difficulty alone. ( Long pause.) The symptoms 
were obvious enough: stiffness, slowing down of motion, and 
general lack of mobility. I could keep track easily enough, I thought, 
of my own progress as I worked directly with my body, without 
drugs to confuse the issue, and with no one else between me and the 
reality I had so cunningly created. How else could I really leam 
anything? The more middlemen that I entertained between my 
physical condition and my personal beliefs, the more confused I 
thought I'd be. 

(Long pause at 9:21.) I'm not sure where I drew the line. If I'd felt I 
was suffering a heart attack, for example, I knew I would rush to the 
hospital, but this was a chronic condition. The diagnosis — which I 
mentioned in my first session (on April 1 ) — gave a pinpointed, 
specific cause: a severely underactive thyroid gland, a situation that 
in no way contradicts Seth's own larger interpretation of my physical 
state. 

(9:25.) I still must have needed the doctors to tell me so. Seth was 
right: I was going too slow — not too fast, as I had feared. I had 
calmed myself down too far, disciplined myself overmuch, until my 
only hope was to change my course at once. 

Doctors had terrified me as a child, when my mother was already 
bedridden with arthritis, and when I was diagnosed as having an 
overactive thyroid gland — an affliction that could lead, so my 
mother told me, to insanity and death. If the medical profession had 
had anything to do with casting that medical spell, then apparently 
it could be quite effective in removing it. 

(Long pause at 9:35.) By last year, as my symptoms worsened, I 
began to feel that life's frustrations outweighed its pleasures. Other 
annoying events were occurring in our private lives. The company 
that published my books, Prentice-Hall, was changing its structure 
and policy. My longtime friend and editor there, Tam Mossman, was 
considering leaving to work for another publishing firm. And — very 
troublesome to me — came the repeated news that various people 
were "speaking for Seth" publicly, and charging hefty-enough fees. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


47 


(9:43.) I felt that my work was being contaminated, and more, I was 
annoyed and disappointed by those readers who could apparently be 
so taken in by those other Seths. As he has said so many times, Seth 
speaks only through me, to protect the integrity of the material. And it 
is indeed that contract between him and me that always assures you of 
the authenticity of Seth's work. 

In any case, all of those issues weighed upon my mind. 

Now let's see. . . . Okay: I hope sometime to tell the entire story of 
my physical and creative challenges, which as of now of course is 
unfinished. Much of this present manuscript, Dreams, "Evolution, " 
and Value Fulfillment, deals with the development of the individual as 
it is primarily concerned with the development of the universe: The 
two are one. (Long pause.) In man's desire to make creative 
adjustments, it often seems that instead he adds unfortunate blemishes 
to life's vitality. Yet in the long run even these become, finally, 
constructive manipulations whose purposes, perhaps, we did not 
understand at the time. 

(9:49 am. "Well, I guess that's it, "Jane said. "This stuff goes with last 
night's work. " 

"Actually, " she continued much more emphatically now, as we 
discussed her rather mild comments about the other Seths, "I'm deeply 
outraged that some people who considered themselves followers' of 
mine or Seth can so easily fool themselves when they claim to be 
speaking for Seth — be so blind to their own motives, or not recognize 
the fact that they're taking advantage of people. They're also using my 
work to validate their own. . . .") 


Concerning Jane's understandable desire to protect her work, long ago she 
published some very clear statements about that. In Chapter Nine of The Seth 
Material (1970) she wrote: "Several people have told me that Seth 
communicated with them through automatic writing, but Seth denies any such 
contacts, saying that his communications will be limited to his work with me, 
in order that the integrity of the Seth Material be preserved." And in her 
introduction to Seth Speaks (1972), she quoted Seth from the 510th session for 
January 19, 1970: "While my communications will come exclusively through 
Ruburt (Jane) at all times, to protect the integrity of the material, I will invite 
the reader to become aware of me as a personality. ..." 



48 


Jane Roberts 


After all, if he dues come through others — or can if he wants to — 
why hasn't Seth himself simply said so, and repeatedly, in the books as 
we've published them over the years? We'd have respected his 
statements on that aspect of his abilities and intents as much as we did 
— and do — on any other. To have attempted to censor Seth since 1963, 
say, to "keep him to ourselves" on that particular subject, would have 
long ago turned into an impossibly complicated and dishonest task: 
Jane and I would have become involved in a constant distortion of his 
material as we rewrote the sessions. Such a procedure could have 
turned into a creative tragedy for us and for our readers. 

Even in God of Jane, which was published in 1981, Jane presented 
some relatively late material from Seth to show that he doesn't 
independently communicate with others. The idea that he'd done so can 
be inspiring, however. In Chapter 20 of her book, see Session 876 for 
August 27, 1979. After explaining how a couple of women (among 
others) had recently claimed that he had been in contact with them, Seth 
stated: "Now, I did not communicate with those women — but their 
belief in me helped each of them use certain abilities." 

This whole miniature tempest is almost enough to make one wonder: 
How come those other people made their "Seths" known after Jane 
began to speak for her Seth, and to publish the Jane-Seth material? 
Being inspired to use one's own abilities is a perfectly understandable 
development that we can be very happy about. But to claim to speak for 
Jane's Seth per se, as a means of expression, is quite another thing. . . . 


ESSAY 6 

Tuesday, April 20, 1982 

(8:47 a.m. Our original idea was to insert the session Jane gave this 
morning in one of the earlier essays. This would have been a very 
mechanical approach. More, it would have involved altering dates, 
and changing or eliminating some of the copy to make the rest of it fit 
— all things I dislike doing. After Jane came through with her 
dictation I told myself I'd know what to do with it, and awoke the next 
morning with the clear understanding that her session should be 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


presented just a.s is, and when we received it. Jane said okay. The 
subjects discussed are deeply charged for us, and the physical and 
psychological aspects of some of them could be devastating if we 
allowed them to be. Presenting the session in a more isolated manner 
here, then, may give the reader a clearer idea of how we felt during 
Jane's early days in the hospital [and later too, for that matter]. This 
course also lets the session serve as an automatic bridge to some of 
the material in the earlier essays. 

So last night, less than two days after she'd held her last session, I 
asked Jane for some material about the central theme of her days in 
the hospital, both from her own viewpoint and that of the doctors 
who probed, examined, and discussed her and her problems. Some of 
them talked about her right in front of her as though she weren't 
there — and, Jane said, with her hearing still much impaired at that 
time, she almost felt as though she wasn't there. 

For the third time in five days she began dictating her own 
material right after breakfast. Once again from the card table in the 
living room:) 

It seemed to me that once medical science got hold of you it 
wanted to justify its existence, to exercise its wonders for those 
fortunate or unfortunate enough to be considered "proper 
candidates" for its full ministrations. 

Several of the brightest young rheumatologists and orthopedic 
surgeons had my future all mapped out for me, or so it appeared, as 
they discussed my case. When they spoke to Rob and me I tried to 
listen, but my hearing was still so poor that it was nearly impossible 
to make out one full sentence at a time. All the doctors seemed to 
agree that I had a kind of burned-out case of rheumatoid arthritis, 
with little active inflammation. But one doctor soberly told me that 
I'd never walk again, or even put my weight upon my feet again, 
unless I underwent a series of joint-replacement operations — if he 
cautioned, I proved to be a "proper candidate." 

Being a proper candidate meant that I would turn my life over to 
medical science in the hospital for at least a year: a year spent in 
therapy, surgical procedures, and more therapy, until I ended up 
having at least four separate operations. My knee joints and hip 
joints could thus be replaced. 

My condition had certain drawbacks, however: The two sides of 
my body were uneven, so I could end up with four bright new metal 
and plastic joints and still not be able to 



50 


Jane Roberts 


walk properly. I might need a cane, or a walker. Medical science 
would be willing to try, however. Out ol the goodness of its heart, all 
of its scientific procedures would be put at my disposal. True, the 
amount of money required for such surgical possibilities was 
staggering, but insurance of one kind or another could be found to 
carry the cost. (We didn't have nearly enough money, but could 
qualify for adequate insurance by fulfilling the terms of an 11 -month 
waiting period.) But regardless of cost, one orthopedist saw me 
staying right in the hospital — now that I was there — until the entire 
procedure was finished. Particularly if, again, I proved to be a proper 
candidate. 

(Long pause at 9:02.) Being a proper candidate meant getting rid of 
those bedsores, for one thing, as well as taking extensive physical 
therapy. As I listened to the doctor talk, poor hearing or no, I could 
almost feel medical science starting up all of its gears, ready to go to 
work on my behalf — and I wasn't ready to make any such decision 
right then. I wanted to see how my body would react to the synthetic 
thyroid hormone and to therapy first. I wished to hell I could 
(underlined) run, I thought, for boy, I'd have run right out of there, 
fast! 

(9:05.) The particular group of young doctors I saw, the specialists, 
were probably the fanciest-looking dandies that Elmira has known. 
They were superlative-looking young men, dressed in the latest of 
fashions, and even in the hospital it was apparent that they were 
properly clothed in the finest of social mores as well. They were in 
their collective way like magicians, producing wonders out of the 
clear air, stunning you with their charming smiles and manners, 
trying to win you over to some strange cause. 

(9:12.) In this case it was the operation cause. It was the only way to 
go: What a crime to accept less than full, complete motion at my age 

(53)1 

(A one-minute pause at 9:13, eyes blinking, then closing.) One doctor 
told me that my body's mobility would be bound to change for the 
better as my thyroid gland . . . 

(After a long pause in midsentence Jane began to doze. Her head 
dipped down. Her body began to slowly lean against the right arm of 
her chair in what has become a characteristic pose, for both her 
thyroid activity, and therefore her energy, are still below par even 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


51 


though she's been out of the hospital for 24 days now. By 9:1 7 she was 
asleep. Watching her tilt more and more, I wondered whether she truly 
had the psychic and physical reserves to heal herself— whether 
anybody would under the circumstances. Perhaps her challenges were 
too much for her. What were her limits, how much more could she take 
after some 11 years of ever-increasing struggle, whether or not those 
challenges had been chosen — some of them far in advance— for 
whatever reasons? 

Jane came awake at 9:20. "Now that was just on the operation thing 

"Did you know you were asleep?" 

"Not until I woke up, " she said with a half-guilty grin. "Now there's 
some stuff I want written down, but you won't approve because it's not 
for the intro — " 

"/ don't give a damn, " I said. "If you don't want it in the book, okay. 

We can still get it, can't we?") 

(9:25 am. "That's all of the stuff on the Introduction, then .... "And 
now Jane dictated the equivalent of three typewritten pages of "other 
hospital material" that she knew she'd eventually want to use 
somewhere.) 

Actually, I came to realize, Jane was so terrified by the thought of 
those operations that mentally she shunted aside all such prospects. 
Only when she was home did she begin to fathom the possible depths of 
the physical reality she'd created for herself, with my help. To coin a 
phrase, she was "truly, deeply shocked." The doctors wanted to literally 
cut the major joints out of her body! To replace them with metal and 
plastic joints inserted into the bone ends and cemented in place. Jane 
cried. Her voice shook. "But in spite of everything, over all those years I 
never felt sick until 1 went into the hospital," she wailed. The glowing 
reports we heard and read about successful joint-replacement operations 
meant little to her. "Sure, for one joint, or two, maybe," I said, then shut 
up, not wanting to add my own fears to her fears. But four of those 
operations? And why stop there? If they fixed her knees and hips, what 
about her shoulders? She couldn't raise her arms level with them. "Oh, 
they'd operate on the shoulders, too," a doctor told me in front of Jane, 
without inflection, as though we were discussing an inanimate mecha- 
nism that needed rebuilding. Six operations, then. But what about my 
wife's elbows, and her fingers? Somebody at the hos- 



52 


Jane Roberts 


pital — I forget who — told us that joint replacements for the fingers 
and/or knuckles usually weren't all that successful: The bones in the 
hands were pretty small and delicate. But it could well be argued that 
Jane needed to be able to write with a pen or pencil, to express her 
basic creativity in that particular elementary fashion, even more than 
she needed to walk. (It would be great if she could at least use a 
typewriter!) So there could be eight operations, or ten, or . . . ? 

What might happen to the body, I wondered, even if its psychic 
tenant were willing to endure any or all of those "surgical procedures"? 
I answered my own question by remembering accounts I had on file, 
explaining how people of various ages had withstood numerous, 
incredible operations, sometimes over a period of years. But I was 
horrified to think that my dear wife might become involved in a similar 
reality, with or without my unwitting compliance. I knew that she was 
far from making any decisions about surgery, but I recoiled from 
pushing any such suggestions upon her, no matter how fine it would be 
to see her on her feet. Joint-replacement operations were irreversible 
procedures, and I also had on file material about how they sometimes 
failed. 

Short of outright failure, however, some of the articles I've collected 
contain the information that a conventional artificial joint replacement 
— for a knee, say — usually lasts only from four to seven years before 
loosening. A most discouraging prospect! What does one do when the 
insert begins to wobble? None of the doctors we'd talked to had 
mentioned such a possibility. (One can always claim that being able to 
walk for even four years is a lot better than not walking at all!) Jane and 
I also read that through experiments with animals medical designers are 
working to perfect an artificial knee joint with porous surfaces, to 
promote better bonding of bone to metal; it could last 15 years or more. 
Someday, I told Jane, and regardless of whether or not we ever choose 
to take advantage of any of them, we'll be questioning orthopedic 
surgeons very closely about what "surgical procedures" are available. 

As I wrote in the first essay, "the trouble with having something 
diagnosed as rheumatoid arthritis is that not only do you have it when 
you go into the hospital, but when you leave it." Even if Jane had all of 
those operations — even if she ended up 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


53 


able to walk alter a fashion — she'd still have arthritis. She was suffused 
with it. Our beliefs said so. So did her body, as everyone could see. 
"Your joints are destroyed," Dr. Mandali told Jane, after getting the 
opinion of the young out-of-town rheumatolo-gist she'd asked to 
examine my wife. "Do you want to spend the rest of your life inside, in 
a wheelchair? That's a pretty limited existence you're talking about 
there. . . ." And Jane, trying to protect herself from the negative 
suggestions that had been administered to her like psychic 
hammerblows, ever since she'd entered the hospital, could only weakly 
demur on the subject of operations. 

Let me quickly add that all of the doctors who examined her 
advanced their suggestions while trying to be helpful, and in the name 
of "truth" as they saw it — with individual variations, of course. To us, 
however, in all but one case their general unconscious biases were 
negative. The exception was the youngish doctor Jane had referred to at 
the very end of her last session. As it happened, he was the one who'd 
had her admitted to the hospital to begin with. He'd offered Jane 
encouragement as she is, and she had felt an immediate psychic rapport 
with him. But he was a neurologist, and we saw less and less of him as 
it was determined that his special skills wouldn't be of continuing help 
in Jane's situation. In the overwhelming medical view, then, as Jane 
said, the operations were the only way for her to go. . . . 


ESSAY 7 

Friday, May 7, 1982 

In this essay I'll touch upon a number of subjects. Some of them have 
already been mentioned. During our work on these pieces Jane and I 
have automatically been led back to earlier material again and again, 
but each time we've tried to plunge deeper into the topic under 
discussion, to uncover new layers of meaning and insight. (Doing this 
always reminds us of additional points to cover, of course!) Putting it all 
together is an extremely challenging endeavor as I try to summarize our 
years of committment to the Seth material — for inevitably we end up 
dealing with 



54 


Jane Roberts 


ideas lying outside society's generally accepted frameworks of belief. 
Forty-one days have now passed since Jane left the hospital, and this 
passage of "time" alone has given us more perspective on the whole 
affair of her illness, and on our beliefs, intents, and desires. 

Among the subjects not discussed so far are Seth's (and our own) 
ideas on reincarnation, counterparts, probable realities, and 
Frameworks 1 and 2. Jane briefly referred to Seth's "magical approach" 
material in her dictation last month (see her own session of April 16, 
1982, in Essay No. 3 on that date) — thus prefacing the long quotations 
from her "sinful self." So as counterpoint to her writings on the sinful 
self, I'll be presenting two excerpts to hint at what Seth does mean by 
his magical approach. 

Aside from any books that he may produce himself (and on whatever 
subjects), I've already made plans to put together a short volume 
featuring Seth's discussions on the magical approach to reality. A year 
earlier Jane had begun a much more ambitious project involving this 
material, as she mentioned on April 16, but she laid it aside for reasons 
already covered. My version will mainly feature the dozen or so 
sessions Seth gave in August-September 1980, and the poetry Jane was 
inspired to write because of them. She may also contribute an 
introduction to the book, showing how Seth's and her own sinful-self 
information are related to the magical approach. 

If, as Jane dictated in her session for April 17, "We live in a world 
slung between our dearest hopes and greatest fears," then surely it can 
be said that she's chosen to delve into at least some of her "greatest 
fears." Her present impaired condition is certainly generating powerful 
physical and psychic conflicts and challenges, and it's my personal 
assessment that she's dealing with these in her own unique way. That 
way is different from anybody else's way. I think that if parts of her 
psyche "fear those fears," other parts do not — or that at least they chose 
to confront them, and actually began doing so many years ago. 
Otherwise Jane's "symptoms" couldn't exist on any level. Nor am I 
implying ideas of predestination. The chances here for exploration are 
very extensive, of course. And I still implicitly believe the quotation 
Seth gave on April 16, 1981, over a year ago now: " In that larger picture 
there are no errors, for each action, pleasant or 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


55 


not, will in its fashion be redeemed, both in relation to itself and ... to a 
larger picture that the conscious mind may not be able presently to 
perceive." 

I'm certainly not writing here about the idea of redemption in the 
ordinary religious sense, although I think it's perfectly possible that in 
some other frameworks, larger than our taken-for-granted physical and 
psychological one, the idea of redemption — of understanding and 
embracing — may be involved in a "religious" sense, as part of an 
intuitive grasp of All That Is. 

Since I'm so closely related to Jane in this life, through marriage, as 
well as through at least several reincamational and counterpart roles 
(according to Seth and our own feelings), I'm as deeply involved in this 
search for redemption as she is. Given our present ideas about the 
limitless nature of consciousness, we think our joint quest has been 
underway since before our births — by choice — and we expect it to 
continue for the rest of our physical lives. I don't mean that physical or 
psychic healings, for example, can't or won't take place "this time 
around," but that if they do happen they too will be deeply connected 
with those overall, much broader patterns of our lives. To me, 
redemption means a continuous search or journey, then, involving 
whatever events and interchanges we choose to create, for whatever 
purposes, along the way — and truly, I think, some of those purposes will 
involve things "the conscious mind may not be able presently to 
perceive." That we believe such things speaks for our own brands of 
faith, then, and also signifies that Jane and I think we have much to 
learn. And we try to keep in our minds Seth's statement that "your 
intellect does not have to know the answers to all of your questions." 

Jane and I live our physical lives on mundane levels, though, as 
everyone else does, so it's inevitable that we often find ourselves 
meeting our daily challenges within those frameworks. We practice one 
big difference, however — for we hold within ourselves Seth's ideas on a 
host of subjects. It seems that we can feel his concepts — intermingled 
with our own questions, ideas, and accomplishments — constantly 
turning within a kind of special excitement and revelatory insight. This 
is true for us even when things aren't going well, when we feel "dumb" 
or blocked about whatever we may be trying to do. 

At such times I'm apt to think about ideas of reincarnation 



56 


Jane Roberts 


and counterparts. Right here I'm dealing with just two of Seth's larger 
concepts. But without dwelling upon them too heavily, I may consider 
the notion of my larger, nonphysical "whole self' or "entity" being 
made up of a number of other psychically related physical selves 
projected into time. For Seth, basically there is no time, only a great 
"spacious present" that's a manifestation of a sublime, indescribable All 
That Is. Our gross physical senses, and indeed our very bodies, insist 
upon interpreting the spacious present in linear terms, however — 
through the inevitable processes of birth, aging, and death — so to help 
us get his point here Seth advances his ideas of reincamational selves 
and counterpart selves in ways we can understand sensually. 

He tells us that our reincamational selves explore the past, present, 
and future — but basically all at once, since time as he defines it is 
simultaneous. I've written before that as physical creatures we're always 
going to find the contradictory notion of "simultaneous time" hard to 
comprehend, intellectually at least. 

Before proceeding I want to make clear just what I mean by 
"reincamational selves" (while confining this discussion to "past" lives 
for the moment). For it's also contradictory to say, for example, that "I 
was a serf in the 12th-century Germanic state of Bavaria." As Seth and I 
both noted in Volume 2 of "Unknown " Reality, each of us has our focus 
of identity now — not in some other portion of the spacious present, just 
as each reincamational self has his or her own historical focus of 
identity. How could it be otherwise? 

Could one return to that 12th-century life, even as an observer, what 
would the traveler find? An individual — and one not about to surrender 
his or her identity to anyone, or have it thought of simply as a 
manifestation of some "future" self! I think that when they blithely talk 
about having lived other lives people forget that those living before 
were — are — fully independent creatures, even if they are psychically 
related to others. The traveler could hardly move in on one of his or her 
own personalities! Interesting question: How would our 20th-century 
individual react when told by a visitor from the year 2355 (for example) 
that he or she represented one of our futurian's "past" lives? 

The serf will invariably be looking at his time through a different 
focus than his future self could ever do. And think of the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


57 


added challenges of feeling and perception where sexual changes 
between present and past incarnations are involved! Eroticism — and 
yes, outright sexual curiosity and arousal over reversed genitalia, for 
instance — must enter in sometimes, although in print at least these 
specifics of sex in connection with reincarnation seem to be a taboo 
subject. By contrast, there's plenty of material in the reincamational 
literature on the generalized patterns of sexual behavior, from 
promiscuity to repression. (1 wonder whether a long-term past-life 
sexual fantasy could be connected to a real sexual problem or challenge 
in a present — or future — life.) 

But would our time traveler ever want to give up his or her present 
mental and physical focus to enter completely into an earlier 
personality? I think not, in the overwhelming majority of cases — and 
perhaps never — for in those terms it would mean surrendering a portion 
of the whole self or entity that had, through a projection into our 
scheme of "present" time, attained a certain consciousness and physical 
form of a unique degree. Yet, on second thought I wouldn't dare rule out 
completely such bizarre developments. Perhaps transfers like that can 
and do take place within the vast arena of probable realities (which I'll 
also be discussing in this essay). If so, then, they would be strange only 
from our limited viewpoints. 

Further, Jane and I believe that what really happens during a "past- 
life regression" under hypnosis is that the subject (aside from any 
responses given to the hypnotist's own witting or unwitting suggestions) 
very cosily views his or her previous lives from the comfort and safety 
of a present existence. This would be the case even when the subject is 
very unhappy with present challenges, and is trying to assign their 
origin to events in one or more former existences. All well and good to 
announce that one was a serf some 900 years ago — but one is much 
more likely to be either tuning into minute signals surrounding the 
actual physical and mental reality of the serf (poor fellow), or to be 
picking up on elements of that individual's personality as they're 
associated with the serfs whole self or entity. Either possibility makes it 
much safer — and much more entertaining — to proclaim one's serfdom. 

There's so much I could discuss here that the lack of time and space 
is very frustrating. I can only hint at what I consider to be 



58 


Jane Roberts 


important points. The books and magazines dealing with reincarnation 
— and the tapes, too, these days — swarm with tales of journeys to past 
lives, and some of those accounts are most spectacular. Yet, even given 
ancient concepts like that of Seth's spacious present, the participants in 
such adventures usually quite happily ignore the conclusion that 
reincarnation should also operate from the opposite direction — the 
future — just as well! As a very perceptive young lady wrote Jane and 
me recently, why can't people be progressed to their future lives just as 
successfully as they're regressed to their past lives? Indeed. Our rather 
copious mail brings us questions like that very rarely. (The key word 
there, I think, is "successfully.") 

Back in 1974 Seth responded to my own musings on the subject by 
commenting: "You are afraid to consider future lives because then you 
have to face the death that must be met first, in your terms." (See 
Appendix 12 for Volume 2 of "Unknown" Reality.) Seth referred to the 
conventional, culturally instilled fear of death that most of us carry, of 
course. Surely one's death to come is a much more personal and 
penetrating prospect — a much more frightening one — than "facing" any 
past-life deaths one may encounter: Those deaths have already 
happened! But it certainly seems that in those terms present challenges 
could be illuminated through exploring "future" lives as well as those of 
the past. 

I referred to a "successful" progression because reaching into the 
future is evidently much more difficult. By its very nature a future life 
cannot be proven — records checked, and so forth. Anything goes. Jane 
and I have read of many systems designed to regress the individual to 
past lives. Often such "trips" are mediated by hypnosis. It can even 
happen spontaneously, and I had a most exhilarating glimpse of a past 
life of my own that way. (See Session 721 in Volume 2 of "Unknown" 
Reality.) However, neither of us have had such an outright encounter 
with a future self — that we know of. I'd say that under hypnosis the urge 
to fantasize the future lives must be a tempting one; but what's the 
explanation for achieving little more than a formless future state while 
"under," no matter how hard one tries? The failure to get there, to turn 
time around, could be taken as a sign of resistance on the part of the 
present self. (Or even a past self or selves, but that's too complicated a 
subject to go into here.) 




Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


59 


And how about reaching a future life through the dream state, 
perhaps abetted by hypnosis or self-suggestion before sleep? Our own 
results have been ambiguous at best, in contrast with the "ordinary" 
precognitive dreams Jane and I have had, which we can document 
through our written records. Future-life dream recall may be thoroughly 
disguised so as to not alarm the guardian, conscious present self. I've 
often speculated that clues to oncoming lives must exist within the 
hundreds of dreams I've recorded. 

Accounts of projecting into distant fixture lives seem rare: Perhaps 
the conscious self deeply hesitates at swimming in such uncharted 
pools of consciousness, even though present and future relationships 
are assumed. 

My main point is that I also feel, without having asked Seth, that the 
farther one travels ahead in time the greater the play of probable 
realities and probable lives he or she encounters. To venture into such a 
skein requires that one constantly picks and chooses among them — for 
each move, each thought, even, can launch the traveler into a different 
probability. In some cases there will be a great fear of becoming lost 
among all of those realities. (What if one doesn't want a probable 
reality they choose? But that must happen all of the time!) The 
uncertainty perceived here by the conscious self, however, can act as a 
great restraint toward knowing a fixture life or lives — just as much as 
might the fear of tuning into one's physical death ahead of time in this 
life. Hook up those two factors with the quite natural concern that at 
least some events in any life to come will inevitably be unpleasant, or 
worse, and we have at least three powerful restraints, or psychic blocks, 
inhibiting awareness of fixture lives. There would be others. Everything 
considered, we may just not want to know about fixture lives most of 
the time. 

I'll digress a moment to note that it's quite obvious that when 
conducted by skilled therapists past-life regression has proven to be of 
great benefit to certain individuals. Whether or not reincarnation has 
been proven objectively, the belief structures surrounding that concept, 
or even the idea of it, have served very well as a forum within which 
certain present-life challenges have been worked out, through the 
therapists' use of hypnosis, allegory, association, symbolism, and other 
very respectable methods. 



Jane Roberts 


How richly creative we are: Each of our presents is part of the future 
from the standpoint of the past; each of our presents is also part of the 
past from the standpoint of the future. 

I think it quite humorous (and ironic) that whether or not they realize 
it, those who engage in past-life regressions play with the notion of 
future selves all of the time — for from the standpoint of any "past" lives 
they reach their present lives obviously represent future existences. In a 
way, and in those terms, this also applies in Jane's case when she 
contacts Seth, even on the "psychological bridge" those two have 
constructed between them: When Seth tells us that his last physical life 
was in Denmark in the 1600s, then Jane and I represent future physical 
selves of his. I put it this way because Seth himself has commented that 
the three of us are "offshoots of the same entity." (This time, see 
Appendix 18 for Volume 2 of "Unknown" Reality.) Yet we are all of us 
different now: "Ruburt (Jane) is not myself now, in his present life. He 
is nevertheless an extension and materialization of the Seth that I was at 
one time ." 

All of this is most simplified. One ought to be very careful about 
assigning past and future status to various portions of a self, for 
ultimately, as one moves further into the spacious present, such 
constructions as the past, present, and future begin to melt away. And, 
as in Seth's case and Jane's case, probabilities and choices come much 
more prominently into play. 

However, Jane and I don't particularly think that in our present lives 
we've been that greatly influenced by any successes, failures, or 
illnesses chosen from other lives except in the broadest of terms: 
general bodily and personality characteristics and abilities, say. I freely 
note, and with some humor, that this can be somewhat of a jointly 
contradictory attitude for us. Perhaps we're too stubborn about agreeing 
wholeheartedly that such possibilities exist, or perhaps we're just too 
enamored of our "present" physical lives, even with all of our 
challenges, to want to fully concur with Seth. 

Our attitudes, then, may point up our unconscious strengths and 
weaknesses when it comes to our acceptance and use, or nonuse, of at 
least portions of the Seth material. We may be more "prisoners," or 
more deeply rooted in our times and concepts, than we like to admit. 
Consciously, however, Jane has never been overly enthusiastic about 
the idea of reincarnation to 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


begin with. I've noted in other books that she seldom talks about it. She 
was brought up as a Roman Catholic, and more than passionately 
embraced that faith. Yet she was early subjected to the church's rigid 
opposition to the whole idea of reincarnation because, strangely 
enough, even in her very youthful poetry she dealt with the forbidden 
subject (although not by name). Jane does believe that long ago she left 
behind the church's dogmas on reincarnation. She doesn't want to use 
the concept as a crutch; her caution stems from other beliefs, on which 
I'll quote her shortly. (As for myself, while growing up I knew nothing 
of reincarnation beyond its name.) But we'll be the first ones to agree 
that in certain Seth sessions, and in her very evocative poetry, Jane has 
encouraged her intuitive and creative selves to seriously discuss 
reincarnation. This is very evident in her second and latest book of 
poetry, If We Live Again: Or, Public Magic and Private Love, which 
was published in December of last year (1981). From the beginning of 
Section 3 of "I Am Alive Again": 

/ am alive again, 
remembering a thousand seasons, 
arranging and rearranging 
Aprils and Septembers 
in my mind's transparent vase 
and placing it on the shelf 
of my attention — 
a miniature still life. 

It can be seen from even this tiny quotation that Jane's poetry reflects 
that same mystical, intuitive innocence before nature (and thus, 
ultimately, All That Is) that I tried to describe in the first essay. It could 
well be that her psyche has derived from her whole self, or entity, the 
"facts" of reality a lot better than either of us consciously knows them. 
Both of us have had our psychic expressions (really isolated episodes) 
involving what can be called simultaneously existing reincamational 
selves, and we've published accounts of a few of these. Some of our 
experiences have come in dream states. Our independence relative to 
reincarnation may represent just conscious cussedness on our parts, but 
we believe that each of us (meaning anyone, that is) always has the 
freedom to accept or reject any such choice or causality 



62 


Jane Roberts 


— whatever we choose to do. No, instead we think of our current 
challenges as contributing to the knowledge of our whole selves in 
most specific ways, rather than our being swayed that much by our 
reincamational and/or counterpart associations. However, I'm not at all 
sure how many others feel that way. I do know that regardless of local 
variations an acceptance of reincarnation has encircled the earth for 
millennia, and that in our country recent polls show a quarter of the 
population believing in it. 

I also know that in a couple of chapters for Dreams itself Seth 
referred to the genetic factors involving reincarnation. He said that 
basically both our genetic structure and our reincamational history are 
systems of consciousness, that they're "intermixed." The former is 
physical, the latter is psychic, a part of our inner bank of knowledge. I 
don't doubt that he's right — that is, in our temporal lifetimes we call 
upon whatever systems of consciousness we desire to, at whatever 
"time": a matter of choice and free will operating within the broad 
parameters of our sexual orientation and other personality factors. 

I keep wondering about the results of an individual's choosing not to 
call upon any of his or her bank of reincamational lives, though, 
whether from the past or the future. This approach would very nicely 
eliminate having to deal with one's "karma" this time around — should 
there really be a system of consciousness embodying that ancient 
concept. Think of the fun a person could have who decided at an early 
age — or even before physical birth — to experience a life unencumbered 
by other psychic relationships; wherein it had little or nothing to "work 
out." What freedoms might lie ahead — and yes, what challenges, too! 
Buddhism and Hinduism would banish the very thought: How dare one 
even think of escaping, or just simply ignoring, his or her "fate or 
destiny" (to put it loosely)! Yet our mass reality obviously is large 
enough to allow me room to generate such fanatical thoughts. . . . 

All of this reminds me that lately the media have carried a number of 
stories detailing how medical science is not only trying hard to 
approach cures for scourges like cancer (in cancer's case, possibly 
through the exploration and understanding of the role played in the cell 
nucleus by altered normal cells called oncogenes), but is already 
claiming to have narrowed down its search to specific genes that affect 
imponderables like 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


63 


behavior — depression, for example. Not only that, sociobiologists are 
advancing their very controversial ideas that much of human behavior 
has an ultimate genetic basis, which in turn influences cultural change, 
and so on. 

Well, one may ask, if a so-called negative quality like depression has 
a genetic foundation, what about the genetics for a positive attribute 
like joy — or, even, something like reincarnation? (I haven't come across 
anything in the media yet about either one of those.) If reincamational 
and genetic systems are intermixed, then it could be said that even a 
person's decision to ignore his or her reincamational heritage was in 
itself genetically based — and it could be fun to explore the 
contradictory ramifications of such a state. What other wonders might 
our cells contain? While amusing myself I'm simplifying to a great 
degree: If traces of one's "successive" lives are genetically embedded, 
sorting them out would be an enormous task. 

It would be impossible at this time, I'm certain, for a researcher to 
find any evidence that reincamational heritages are coded for among 
the approximately 100,000 genes lined up on the 46 chromosomes we 
carry in the nucleus of each of our cells. We say that a certain gene 
contains the instructions for the manufacture of a certain protein the 
body uses in the construction or function of an eye, for instance, and 
that in expressing that code the gene passes on characteristics inherited 
from physical ancestors — but is that endowment influenced or directed 
in any fashion by reincamational attributes as well? Might those factors 
be just as potent as those inherited from a grandfather, say? The genes 
in each cell have their individual jobs to do in furnishing the quivering 
templates for the manufacture (via the nucleic acids DNA and 
messenger RNA) of all of our bodily proteins. But if we think of our 
genetic endowment as first being a system of consciousness as our 
reincamational history is, we can see how the two nonphysical systems 
could be intermixed, as Seth put it, with one influencing the other. 
Conceivably, each of us could be a mixed bag of ancestral and 
reincamational heritages, then — more "mongrelized" than we may care 
to admit. Interesting. . . . What we choose to do with those possibilities 
that we present ourselves with at each temporal birth may be another 
matter entirely. 

And nowhere in this part of my discussion, in order to keep it 



64 


Jane Roberts 


within manageable bounds in this essay, have I mentioned the inherent 
ramifications involving genetics and reincarnation and probable 
realities. 

"I think that a too-specific 'reading' of reincamational material leads 
us to forget time's simultaneous nature and promotes a 'nitty-gritty' 
attitude," Jane wrote for me as I was working on these passages. "We 
may want to know the place and the time of a past self, for example — 
and the very concentration upon the 'past' simply deepens our 
co mm itment to time. The search for detail leads us further away from 
the larger sensed dimensions in which those facts must lie. 

"I feel that Rob and I have lived our lives together many times, for 
example, and in many relationships. But I don't want to spend a lot of 
'time' learning about those lives. I 'know' we change and replenish those 
other existences. 

"When I write poetry I can often feel that translife focus, and catch 
the 'real facts.' " 

We're not against reincarnation, then, only careful about our beliefs 
concerning it. Within the context of my discussion, reincarnation is 
Seth's historical version of his counterpart concept, which is that each 
of us is physically connected with certain other males and females who 
are living at the same time we are, and who are exploring physical life 
from a variety of viewpoints in ways that no one physical self could 
possibly match. This means that each reincamational self has its own 
cluster of counterpart selves within its own time period, and that all are 
interconnected on nonphysical levels, joining together like magical 
gears meshing in constantly changing patterns across time and reality. 
And once one understands ideas of reincarnation and counterparts in 
these terms, it becomes difficult to think of one without the other, so 
inevitable do they appear to be. 

(Obviously, some counterpart selves can meet physically, as 
reincamational selves cannot. Under circumstances and in ways 
explained in Volume 2 of "Unknown " Reality, again, Jane and I think 
we've encountered a few of our counterpart selves. Just for fun, try to 
imagine the complicated relationships that can obtain within only a 
family of five, say, when each member exists within his or her much 
larger family of reincamational and counterpart selves. Let the 
mathematicians among our readers calculate the number of possible 
psychic interchanges alone that 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


65 


can arise in the "past, present, and future" involving the reincamational 
and counterpart selves of these five people!) 

Now what kinds of "redemption" can be found amid the interchanges 
among any combination of reincamational and/or counterpart lives, for 
instance? Some, certainly, and no doubt the reader can think of at least a 
few creative interpretations of redemptive qualities, but I'd rather let the 
question search for its own approximate answers as I continue work 
upon this essay. Jane and I do feel sure, however, that the experiences of 
our current lifetimes have so many psychic and physical ramifications 
that their numbers are literally beyond our grasp — and that many of 
those developments are certain to be quite "alien" to us here in our own 
everday realities. (All of this applies to everyone, of course.) 

I don't really think we can conceive of anything to be truly "alien," 
though, so I use the word here only to lead into the next of Seth's larger 
concepts that I want to mention: that of probable realities, or 
probabilities, as Jane and I usually say. Not only does Seth stress the 
constant psychic motion of reincamational and counterpart selves upon 
this earth we know — but he also tells us that each of those selves can 
move into other or parallel realities. I quote him from Session 681 in 
Volume 1 of "Unknown " Reality: 

"All probable worlds exist now. All probable variations on the most 
minute aspect in any reality exist now. You weave in and out of 
probabilities constantly, picking and choosing as you go along. The 
cells within your body do the same thing." 

So if Jane undergoes illness in this reality, in another she does not — 
but in between those extremes she also explores all stages of her illness 
in a series of probable universes, flashing among them in "no time at 
all," basically. ... In some of those realitites I accompany her in 
various relationships. In others / am the one who becomes ill! In some I 
don't even physically coexist with her. But as Seth has said, since I live 
with her in this probable reality from which I write, then my existence 
is always at least probable within any of her realities. The same applies 
to me from Jane's standpoint. And although Seth hasn't said so yet (that 
I remember), I also think that within the spontaneous plan of probable 
realities each of us — anyone, that is — explores all aspects of sexuality 
and parenthood at the same time. 

Within the idea of probable realities, then, there are innumer- 



66 


Jane Roberts 


able opportunities for redemption to take place, between or among 
creatures — or even between or among ideas — and in all manner of 
ways. In how many ways? Seth remarked a long time ago that we 
humans can at least approach the notion of infinity by considering the 
ramifications inherent within probabilities. For my own amusement, in 
recent years I've often tried to objectify that statement by equating the 
possible number of probable realities with the current scientific estimate 
of the number of atoms in the universe: 10 79 , or a 1 followed by 79 
zeroes. But even if that rather simple number is inconceivable to us it 
still won't do, of course, for it represents only a limit of measurement 
inside the "physical" universe we think we know. Within the li mi tless 
realms of consciousness, 10 79 is still but a doorway to vastly greater 
imaginative quantities and qualities of either numbers or probable 
realities. Fascinating! There are multitudinous possibilities for a 
redemption — or equalization or love or forgiveness, say — to take place 
amid such a dazzling array of probable realities. As far as our 
understanding can go, such a redemptive quality can be psychic, 
physical, both, or simply based on explorations of feeling and 
accomplishment we have yet to know. 

Then beyond those human-oriented parameters must lie a host of 
probable realities involving changes in psychic and physical form: 
rcowhuman aspects of ourselves that in ordinary terms we'd have great 
difficulty relating to. This discussion could be carried further into such 
realms, but instead I'll note that even here 1 don't conceive of anything 
that would prohibit at least some exchanges between certain of those 
far probable realities and our own mundane universe. It all depends 
upon where you want to stop in your thinking, upon what you can 
conceive of. . . . 

We've presented lengthy quotations from Seth on his Framework 1 
and Framework 2 material both in his Mass Events and in Jane's God of 
Jane. His discussions on the subject are an excellent example of how a 
very creative idea, capable of helping many people, can arise from an 
attempt to deal with a personal situation — for on September 17, 1977, 
Seth introduced his Frameworks 1 and 2 concept in a private session 
designed to help Jane contend with her physical symptoms. 

For Seth, Framework 1 is simply a term representing the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


67 


everyday, linear, conscious "working reality" we take for granted, the 
one in which "time" and events automatically unfold in moment after 
undeniable moment. It's the milieu in which most of us unthinkingly 
live out our physical lives. Beyond Framework 1, however, exists 
Framework 2, and it represents the great timeless or simultaneous 
spacious present that's so dearly a manifestation of All That Is. All of 
our dreams, plans, thoughts, actions, and choices live in Framework 2; 
all flow from Framework 2 into Framework 1 according to our beliefs. 

As Seth told us in that introductory session, over four and a half 
years ago, Jane's "body itself has nothing wrong with it except the 
application of beliefs. . . . Even if you think the body does have 
something wrong with it, then the necessary adjustments would be 
made in another kind of time [in Framework 2] that in Framework 1 
would take no time at all — or. the amount of time you thought 
required ." For emphasis I myself underlined that last phrase, because 
it's easy to miss how very important it really is: Our individual concept 
of the amount of time necessary to accomplish an action like a healing 
will govern its progress. Then, a bit later, Seth made a statement that 
I've thought most ironic ever since: "In terms of creativity, however, 
Ruburt has long been operating in Framework 2, and this session 
should help him make certain correlations so that he can automatically 
begin to use such methods in regard to his physical conditon." 

There followed many sessions, both regular and private (or deleted, 
as we sometimes call them), in which Seth discussed Frameworks 1 and 
2. As can happen when we're consciously too close to a deep-seated 
situation, some little time passed before Jane and I realized the obvious: 
It wasn't that we were unable to tune into Framework 2, say, for help in 
effecting a healing for her in the joint reality we'd created in Framework 
1 — but that in physical reality we were drawing from Framework 2 
exactly what we wanted to, even if often on unconscious or unwitting 
levels. Again, a matter of choices, and hard truths to face. As I've tried 
to show in these essays, we didn't suspend our efforts to reach into that 
larger framework. In a variety of ways we kept trying to do just that 
through the screens of our emotions and intellects. In those terms, 
communication between frameworks is unstoppable, really: I think that 
if one could halt the interchanges, 



Jane Roberts 


physical death would result. For us, the learning processes were there 
for the changing anytime we decided that a physical illness was 
"wrong." But it would be wrong only when we decided that we didn't 
need it anymore. 

I should note that Seth has briefly — very briefly — referred to the 
existence of Frameworks 3 and 4. He says, I believe, that initially his 
encounters with Jane take place in a Framework 3 environment. It's my 
own guess that Framework 4 might involve our communication — 
through the first three frameworks — with some of those nonhuman 
probable realities I mentioned not long ago. 

But if the interactions between or among frameworks exist for 
everybody, in our terms, then as far as I'm concerned they exist for each 
thing as well — and I do mean the so-called "inanimate." (This isn't the 
place to go into it, but Seth maintains that for many reasons we 
arbitrarily decide what's living and nonliving.) Each reincamational 
self, each counterpart self and probable self has its complement of 
frameworks. So does the most minute living or nonliving entity and the 
most gigantic. So, "probably," do most of the far-out probable realities 
one can imagine — for I won't go so far as to deny that some probable 
realities may exist without such framework structures. Strange one- 
dimensional "flatlands" indeed! But in each case where those 
framework interactions operate, they help each creation, each presence, 
each essence or vital principle fulfill "a larger picture that the conscious 
mind may not be able presently to perceive." In ways I can't even begin 
to describe here, all frameworks must ultimately be joined within the 
ineffable context of All That Is. 

Early in this essay (which I began on May 7, 1982), I mentioned the 
series of sessions Seth gave in 1980 on his magical approach to reality, 
and the different approaches Jane and I took toward doing books on the 
subject. We were becoming so harried by her worsening physical 
symptoms when that material started to come through that she gave up 
working on Dreams and concentrated on those private sessions instead. 
For many months she considered doing a book on the magical approach 
(with my encouragement), and collected much information of her own 
for it. In other words, she viewed the book as helping herself as much 
as anyone else. Then when Seth and Jane both came through with 
material on her sinful self (see Essay No. 3 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


69 


for April 16, 1982), those data took precedence over everything else. 
That was to be expected, of course, for by then our concentration was 
directed almost wholly into the area of symptoms. Jane didn't return to 
work on Dreams until July 1981, when the two blocks of sinful-self 
material had run their courses. By then, she'd held only one session for 
Dreams in the last 13 months. 

Her focus on her book about the magical approach never jelled 
enough for her to carry it through, even though she continued 
experimenting with it. Our own general psychological unease certainly 
contributed to that failure, but Jane's writing became bogged down in 
details about dates, quotations from old sessions, and elaborate studies 
built upon our dream accounts and other psychic and daily records, for 
example. Not her way of working, really, even though all of those 
ingredients were — and are — excellent. 

Before presenting the promised excerpts on the magical approach, I 
want to note that Seth is simply saying that from Framework 2 (and 
possibly from other frameworks) we draw whatever information we 
want in whatever way we choose to focus upon it: positively, 
negatively, magically, literally, skeptically, and so forth. As he told us in 
a private session way back on February 26, 1972: "You get what you 
concentrate upon. There is no other main rule." Every reincamational 
and counterpart and probable self, located in whatever neatly packaged 
compartment of time — past, present, or future — can utilize the magical 
approach as a matter of choice, then. That simple declaration of use 
involves a world of understanding and experience, however, and one 
that Jane and 1 have found extremely difficult to initiate in the way we 
consciously think we want to — although according to their letters, at 
least, many of our readers are able to work with various portions of the 
Seth material with little or no trouble at all. 

Seth, from the private session for August 17, 1980 — the third one in 
his series on the magical approach: 

"The magical approach takes it for granted, in the simplest terms, 
that the life of any individual will fulfill itself, will develop and mature, 
that the environment and the individual are uniquely suited and work 
together. This sounds very simple. In verbal terms, however, those are 
the beliefs (if you will) of each c-e-1-1 (spelled). They are imprinted in 
each chromosome, in each 



70 


Jane Roberts 


atom. They provide a built-in faith that pervades each living creature, 
each snail, each hair on your head. Those ingrained beliefs are of 
course biologically pertinent, providing the impetus of all growth and 
development. 

"Each cell believes in a better tomorrow (quietly, with amusement). I 
am, I admit, personifying our cell here, but the statement has a firm 
truth. Furthermore, each cell contains within itself a belief and an 
understanding of its own inevitability. It knows it lives beyond its 
death, in other words. ..." 

And: "The magical approach takes it for granted that the human 
being is a united creature, fulfilling purposes in nature even as the 
animals do, whether or not those purposes are understood. The magical 
approach takes it for granted that each individual has a future, a 
fulfilling one, even though death may be tomorrow. The magical 
approach takes it for granted that the means for development are within 
each individual, and that fulfillment will happen naturally. Overall, that 
approach operates in your world. If it did not, there would be no world. 
If the worst was bound to happen, as the scientists certainly think, even 
evolution in their terms would have been impossible, of course — a nice 
point to put in somewhere (all intently, but also with considerable 
humor). 

"You needed this background, for I want to build up the atmosphere 
in which this magical approach can be comprehended." 

In the first essay I described how Dr. Mandali had told Jane that her 
thyroid gland had "simply ceased functioning," and how the doctor had 
started to cautiously rejuvenate my wife's endocrine system with 50 
micrograms daily of a synthetic thyroid hormone. Jane is supposed to 
take these pills in some still-to-be-determined strength for the rest of 
her life (although in his session for April 16 Seth had explained that her 
thyroid gland "has repaired itself' on several occasions; see the essay 
for the same date.) 

After nine weeks, however, Jane and I are more than ready for an 
increase in the strength of the pills, for she obviously needs the boost. 
I've mentioned several times her dozing or falling asleep outright in her 
chair. Dr. Mandali agrees that the low thyroid activity is directly related 
to these episodes. Yet there's 




Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


71 


more involved with the dozing — effects I haven't gone into yet, and can 
only briefly refer to here. We haven't discussed these with her doctor, 
either — clear signs of the secretive aspects of our own natures — but 
Jane believes she's had a number of part-hallucinatory, part-psychic 
experiences as a result of the thyroid-medication situation. 

"I've had several new experiences with altered states of con- 
sciousness," she wrote in labored script, "and these are quite different 
than anything I've done before. For this reason they are difficult to 
classify. . . ." Also, she's indulged in long conversations with me — and 
on occasion with certain friends — when we apparently were present in 
out-of-body states. Related here are actions she thought she was 
participating in with me, say, yet when she "woke up," she discovered 
we hadn't done any of those things. She's referred often to "gaps in my 
consciousness" while dozing. "I don't know what I was doing in my 
chair," she said at 11:05 a.m. yesterday; she'd fallen asleep after telling 
me she had to use the commode. "I don't like the way the thyroid 
business is making me feel. ... I feel like I'm in your way, or in life's 
way. ..." She had certainly been depressed on that occasion, and I'd 
tried to cheer her up. 

In addition, Jane has described some unique versions of out-of-body 
episodes that have grown out of the thyroid-medication connection. 
These haven't been like the typical experience, wherein she'd feel her 
psyche rising out of a physical organism that was securely anchored by 
gravity to her chair to the floor, for example. Instead, she had felt her 
body in the chair lift most convincingly toward the ceiling. . . . 
Sometimes those events became curious indeed — for in her chair Jane 
Hipped over and approached the ceiling of our bedroom feet first. 
Below her, then, was an upside-down television screen, and a pair of 
windows with the cafe curtains at the top instead of the bottom. Not 
only that, but with her double vision Jane sometimes saw two television 
screens and four windows! She hasn't seen her own body sitting below 
her yet, though, as can happen in the out-of-body state, and she hasn't 
seen or talked with any deceased individuals. 

At this time Jane doesn't know just how, or to what extent, 
hallucination was involved in any of these episodes, if at all; sometimes 
the dream state definitely was. But the experiences 



72 


Jane Roberts 


I've mentioned here, plus others, have uncovered some surprising new 
dimensions of her abilities, and later she wants to thoroughly 
investigate and write about them. 


ESSAY 8 

Sunday, May 23, 1982 

It should be obvious by now that in a large measure all of the selves 
and approaches I've delineated in these essays simply represent Seth 
playing around semantically, as he tries to get various portions of his 
ideas through our heads at certain times. All is one, basically, as he 
knows — and can feel — far better from his vantage point than we can 
from ours. (Yet. "Our lives and deaths are now," Jane wrote in Chapter 
10 of God of Jane, quoting herself from her own "psychic library.") 

That all seeming divisions reflect portions of a unified whole is 
surely one of our oldest concepts, growing, in those terms, with us out 
of our prehistory as we struggled to grasp the "true" nature of reality. 
Traditionally we've cast that feeling or knowledge in religious terms, 
for want of a better framework, but I think that more and more now the 
search is also on within science for a theory — even a hypothesis — that 
will lock up our often subjective variables into what might be called a 
more human equivalent of the still-sought-for unified theory in physics. 
What are human beings, anyhow? From what Jane and I can gather 
(through our reading especially), at least some of the world's leading 
scientists are becoming willing to contend with consciousness itself. 
(Including their own consciousnesses? I can't help wondering!) 
Portions of the latest scientific literature I have on hand, particularly 
that produced by physicists, contain references that not long ago would 
have been branded as metaphysical, or even worse. 

But I note with some amusement that science absorbs such heresies 
by weaving them into and developing them out of current establishment 
thinking — concepts, say, like the many-worlds interpretation of 
quantum mechanics. Put very simplisti-cally, this "quantum approach" 
allows for the theme that each of us inhabits but one of innumerable 
probable or parallel worlds. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


73 


Even the theory of evolution is invoked, for those other worlds are said 
to evolve in parallel with the one we inhabit. Yet there is no answer 
within quantum mechanics as to how or why one's personal identity 
chooses to follow a certain probable pathway, and consciousness per se 
is not considered. (Some physicists, however, have implied that 
subatomic particles — photons — communicate with each other as they 
take their separate but "sympathetic" paths.) Pardon my irony here, but 
Seth has always dealt with the ramifications of consciousness and 
maintained also that we do not inhabit just one probable world, but 
constantly move among them by choice — and by the microsecond, if 
one chooses. 

(I'll add that both Seth and quantum theory predict the spontaneous 
creation of particles of matter out of or in "empty" space — events that, 
it seems to me, go against some of the laws of conservation. One of 
these states that matter cannot be created from nothing. Seth says this 
spontaneous creation happens all of the time through the actions of 
consciousness. In the theoretical quantum world, however, certain 
conditions are needed: superheavy nuclei amid strong electrical fields, 
and so forth.) 

Some of our readers, sending us recent books and copies of articles 
written by scientists working on these subjects, have noted that it must 
be nice for Jane and me to have concepts that Seth has been discussing 
for years "corroborated" by the establishment (often we already had the 
material on file, by the way). But once again irony enters in on my part, 
for I'm afraid our answer is that in general science isn't even aware of 
the existence of the Seth material, notwithstanding the letters of 
approval and/or encouragement we receive from individual scientists, 
representing a variety of disciplines. We feel no sense of corroboration. 
As I wrote to a fan just last week: "No matter what he or she may think 
of it personally, no reputable scientist is going to publicly espouse a 
belief in the Seth material. Certainly not career-wise. Not for a long 
time yet, in our opinion, and for many reasons." 

Some day, for our own amusement — but hardly with the idea of 
convincing others, let alone influential scientists — I'll ask Seth to 
comment upon whatever connections may exist between his ideas and 
those embedded in quantum mechanics. I'm sure he's quite entertained 
by the whole situation — yet also compassionate toward the human 
strivings involved. He's never mentioned the 



74 


Jane Roberts 


concept, nor have we asked him to. I think that Jane has little (if any) 
interest in whether any connections might exist between the Seth 
material and the mathematical theory of quantum mechanics. Any 
discussion of this in our books is strictly my own doing, my own 
speculation: I think it fun to play creatively with a theory that is, after 
all, there for anyone to consider, from whatever standpoint. And I 
maintain that the theory of quantum mechanics does contain strong 
paranormal aspects, whether or not science admits this. 

I also think that if asked Seth would point out that since the concept 
of quantum mechanics is based upon the idea that everything we 
"know"' — matter, energy, our sensual information — is made up of 
quanta, or the interactions of insubstantial fields that in turn, and quite 
paradoxically, produce very active subatomic packets or particles, then 
quantum mechanics is at least analogous with his statements that 
basically the universe is composed of consciousness itself. But I think 
that the continuum of consciousness, or All That Is, contains not only 
the phenomena of quantum mechanics, but also Seth's nonphysical EE 
(electromagnetic energy) units, and his CU's (or units of 
consciousness). In those terms, then, quantum mechanics is a theory 
that doesn't penetrate deeply enough into basic reality, even if physicists 
these days are basing their unified field theories upon quantum 
thinking. (These theories are themselves quite incomplete, since at this 
time they incorporate only three of the four basic interactions in nature: 
electromagnetism, and the strong and weak nuclear forces. So far, 
gravitation remains outside all attempts at integration.) 

To me, consciousness or All That Is is an omnipresent, really 
indescribable awareness that to us human beings has no limits, "one" 
containing not only the attributes of time and space and of all feeling, 
thought, and objectivity, but numberless other properties, 
manifestations, and probabilities that lie outside our very limited 
interior and exterior perceptions. In terms of physics, then, reality is 
still unknowable. 

Even if she's to remain in something like her present impaired state, 
Jane said as I wrote the above paragraph, still it seems we're better off 
for having the Seth material than not: "I'd sure as hell rather take my 
chances with it than without!. " she exclaimed, if somewhat ruefully. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


75 


Six days ago, on Mav 18, and to our great relief, Dr. Mandali finally 
stepped up the strength of the thyroid hormone pills she is prescribing 
for my wife — from 50 to 70 micrograms daily. "But the benefits are 
still weeks away," she told Jane. 1 ne increase followed the positive 
results of a blood test the doctor had ordered a few days previously: A 
hospital technician had come to our hill house to draw blood from Jane 
— performing a "phlebotomy service." Now Jane must have such a test 
before each increase in her thyroid medication. 

In our ceaseless search for answers to an unending list of personal 
questions, we discussed the notion that in her own way Jane has 
described a circle from her childhood: Her parents, Marie and Delmer, 
were married in Saratoga Springs, a well-known resort town in upper 
New York State, in 1928. They were divorced in 1931, when Jane was 
two years old. (Jane didn't see her father again — he came from a broken 
home himself — until she was 21.) By the time Jane was three years old, 
her mother was having serious problems with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Indeed, the daughter has only one conscious memory of seeing her 
mother on her feet. All we have are a few photographs Del took of 
Marie not long after their marriage. They show a beautiful woman 
wearing a bathing suit, standing on a beach in Florida. 

Some of our other books contain more information on how-Jane 
grew up fatherless, and with a Marie who soon became bedridden and 
embittered. Mother and child were supported by welfare, and assisted 
over the years by a series of itinerant housekeepers — a number of these 
were prostitutes who, according to Jane, were periodically thrown out 
of "work" when town officials would shut down the "houses," try to 
clean up gambling, and so forth. Marie was a brilliant, angry woman 
who lived in near-constant pain, and who regularly abused her daughter 
through behavior that, if not psychotic, was certainly close to it. (She 
would terrify the young Jane by stuffing cotton in her mouth and 
pretending she'd committed suicide, for example.) Jane also spent time 
in a strictly run Catholic orphanage. Her father died in 1971, when he 
was 68. Her mother died in 1972, at the same age; Jane, who hadn't 
seen Marie for a number of years, did not attend the funeral. I didn't 
urge her to do so, either. For my part, I'd always felt distinctly uneasy in 
Marie's presence on the few occasions we met. 

None of the doctors we talked to would say outright that rheu- 



76 


Jane Roberts 


matoid arthritis is inherited — only that "it seems to run in families," and 
that more women than men develop it. Even today we saw a well- 
known specialist say the same thing on a national television program. 
Yet except for her mother's case there's no history of arthritis in Jane's 
family, outside of a "routine" trace of rheumatism in a couple of 
grandparents. The curious question arises: Why, then, did first Marie 
and then Jane begin showing their symptoms? (As closely as we can 
determine, Marie was about 26 years old at their onset. Jane was 35; 
she'll be 53 tomorrow.) 

My own belief, which I've held for some 15 years, is that in Jane's 
case at least the young girl's psychological conditioning was far more 
important — far more damaging, in those terms — than any physical 
tendency to i nh erit. I think that Marie's domineering rage at the world 
(chosen by her, never forget) deeply penetrated Jane's developing 
psyche, and — again in those terms — caused her to set up repressive, 
protective inner barriers that could be activated and transformed into 
physical signs at any time, under certain circumstances. Out of many 
possibilities, the daughter's conditioning was psychically chosen and 
accepted, and ihrough that focus she meant to interact with the mother's 
behavior. This, to me, is an example of the way a course of probable 
activity can be agreed upon by all involved. 

I even think there's good medical evidence these days for my view of 
Jane's "symptoms," as we've called them for many years. In recent years 
rheumatoid arthritis has been found to be an amazingly complicated 
disease involving a great number of the body's immune factors. In the 
progression of rheumatoid arthritis one's own immunologic system 
turns on the body and damages it. A very simplified explanation is that 
in a process repeated over and over, a variety of defender cells called 
phagocytic monocytes turn into macrophages, or scavenger cells that, in 
turn, release enzymes which consume healthy joint tissue. The resulting 
debris attracts more monocytes, and so on. An inflammatory 
accumulation of cellular detritus finally destroys the joint's cartilage and 
eats away bone. 

This isn't all, however, for experiments have now shown that the 
brain/mind connection can influence immunity, through stressful 
conditioning cither enhancing its effects or subduing them. Until a very 
few years ago it was medical dogma that the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


77 


immune system was entirely independent of any "outside" influence. 
But recently certain brain chemicals were discovered paired off with 
cellular chemical "receptors" in the immune system, and researchers 
expect to find many more of these associations. In physical terms, then, 

I think it quite possible that in Jane's case long-term stress, beginning in 
her early childhood, consistently overstimulated her immune system. 
Over and over Marie told Jane that she was no good, that the daughter's 
birth had caused the mother's illness. Well before she was 10 years old 
Jane had developed persistent symptoms of colitis, an inflammation of 
the large intestine/bowel that is often associated with emotional stress. 
By her early teens she had an overactive thyroid gland. Marie — and 
others — told her that she would bum herself out and die before she was 
20 years old. Her vision was poor; she required very strong glasses 
(which she seldom wore). Finally in her mid-30s there came the 
beginning of rheumatoid arthritis: Jane's immune system greatly 
increased its attack upon her body. 

(I believe that current medical thinking about the immune system and 
arthritis will be much enlarged upon by the time this book is published, 
though I haven't given that much thought to just what new information 
may be acquired. However, I do think I'm accurate concerning the 
connections between Jane's early psychological conditioning and her 
present challenges.) 

A moment ago, 1 referred to the way all involved with my wife could 
agree upon a course of probable activity. There are as many possibilities 
— and probabilities — as one can think of. I can hardly begin to list them 
all here. In Framework 2, for example, Marie, pregnant with Jane, 
could have decided with her daughter-to-be upon certain sequences of 
action to be pursued during their lives. Or in Framework 2 the two of 
them could have cooperated upon such a decision before Marie's birth, 
even. If reincarnation is to be considered, their disturbed relationship 
this time might reflect past connections of a different yet analogous 
nature, and may also have important effects upon any future ones. 
Additionally, Jane could have chosen the present relationship to 
eventually help her temper her reception of and reaction to the Seth 
material, making her extra-cautious; this, even though she'd seen to it 
ahead of time that she would be bom with that certain combination of 
fortitude and innocence neces- 



78 


Jane Roberts 


sary for her to press on with her chosen abilities. She could have made 
a pact ahead of time to "borrow" certain strong mystical qualities from 
her maternal grandfather, who was part French Canadian and part 
Canadian Indian (specific tribe unknown by us), and with whom she 
strongly identified as a child. And Jane's resolve, her will that, 
according to Seth, "is amazingly strong" (in Volume 2 of "Unknown" 
Reality, see the 713th session for October 21, 1974), may buttress the 
understanding and determination of one or more of her counterparts in 
this life; she may meet (or have met) such an individual; another may 
live across an ocean, say, with no meeting ever to take place in physical 
terms. 

In all of this I've barely hinted at the complicated relationships 
involving other family members from the past, present, and future. The 
mathematical combinations possible are vast. And what's my role in all 
of this, for heaven's sake (to make a pun)? Or that of members of my 
own family? What part do I play, and have yet to play, in Jane's 
redemption — as well as my own — and on what level or levels? When 
did the two of us make our own pacts in Framework 2 (or other 
frameworks), and how will they work out in Framework 1? But it's 
even possible that all together Marie, Jane, her grandfather, and I set up 
the original situation before the physical births of any of us — and in 
some probable reality (if not in this one) we did do just that! Words 
become terribly inadequate tools to express what I feel and am trying to 
write here, for I want to record at once every combination of 
relationships I can conceive of. . . . 

Whatever the initial course of action agreed to in just this probable 
reality by everyone involved, from whatever point in the "past," in 
Framework 1 the participants have subjected it to an almost infinite 
variety of choices and modifications through the years: but always — 
always — within nature's great structure, and accompanied by the utter 
freedom of each person concerned to accept, reject, abort, or change the 
whole affair from their individual perspective at any moment. . . . 

To return to just Jane and Marie, then, I think that their long-range 
cyclical behavior and interaction, no matter how painful it may seem on 
the surface, represented deep challenges set up by mother and daughter 
for certain overall purposes that they wanted to experience, separately 
and jointly. Not only would the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


79 


two women be emotionally tested and enriched across physical and 
psychological time, but so would their entities or whole selves. 

One of their common creations within the same time scheme was 
rheumatoid arthritis, of course, for Jane began to show her version of it 
some eight years before Marie died. That mutual illness obviously 
became a deeply charged subject for both of them. However, with that 
fine stubbornness I mentioned in the first essay, Jane never told Marie 
of her own affliction; since the two no longer saw each other, 
consciously Marie never knew. Both of us think she did know 
psychically, though. I even think that mother and daughter shared the 
same case of arthritis — there weren't two separate instances of it. 

"Oh, why did you have to put that in!" Jane cried in anguish as she 
read that last sentence. It happened to mark the end of my day's work, 
which I'd showed to her after supper. "It's a fantastic idea, but — " 

"Well, I know it's a good idea," 1 said. "I think people do it all the 
time. Something like it must happen in epidemics, too. But I didn't 
mean to hurt you — don't pay any attention to it." 

In these last few pages (since I began discussing my beliefs about 
Jane's early psychological conditioning), I've indicated the only kind of 
thinking by which I can personally make sense out of our world these 
days. Particularly when I consider the "news" on the typical front page 
of the typical daily newspaper: All too accurately the "stories" of war, 
pollution, corruption, and poverty and crime show just how little we 
human beings know or understand ourselves at this time — and how far 
we have to go, individually and en masse. As the years have passed, 
I've come to trust more and more my own insights into our behavior as 
a species within the framework of a nature that I believe our kind has 
co-created with every other species on the planet (to confine my theme 
to just our immediate environment for the moment). It all seems very 
complicated, certainly, but as I manipulate in everyday life I don't 
consciously dwell upon all of the ramifications I've mentioned in these 
essays. Instead I try to hold them in the back of my mind as parts of a 
greater whole. So, 1 believe, does Jane. 

Granted that our species' best human understanding of "the mystery 
of life" and of the universe is exceedingly inadequate, 



Jane Roberts 


still Jane and I do not think that nature is totally objective, indifferently 
cruel, or simply uncaring, as science would have us believe. (We also 
have deep reservations about the theory of evolution and its "survival of 
the fittest" dogmas, but this isn't the place to go into those subjects.) Far 
more basic and satisfactory to us are the intuitive comprehensions that 
this "nature" we've helped create is a living manifestation of All That Is, 
and that someplace, somewhere within its grand panorama, each action 
has meaning and is truly redeemed. We are not dwarfed. How could we 
be? For if, as I wrote earlier, Jane and I agree with the ancient idea that 
"all seeming divisions reflect portions of a unified whole," we also 
think that in some fashion the whole is enclosed within each of its parts. 
Science calls the idea holon-omy, but Seth has been saying the same 
thing for years without ever mentioning the word. Jane didn't even 
know it. 

I've written these passages knowing, of course, that many of Seth's 
points and our own are at best theories, if very intriguing ones. Some 
may contend that they're not even theories, but only hypotheses — 
tentatively inferred explanations requiring much further 
experimentation and examination. Worse still (I write with some 
humor), they may "only" be ideas. Whatever their status, Jane and I 
take heart from the letters sent us by many thousands of readers, who 
have time and again explained how they put the Seth material to use in 
very positive physical and mental ways. (Except for a few early 
instances when we inadvertently lost some of our correspondence, 
we've saved all of it. The cartons are piling up in a cellar storeroom. We 
hope that eventually our "fan mail" will serve as the foundation for a 
study concerning the ways in which society reacts to new ideas, 
through the viewpoints, say, of science, philosophy and psychology, 
religion, the "occult," skepticism, generalized deep curiosity, and 
mental illness. Very abusive responses are also involved, as well as 
surprising near-illiterate ones.) 

Because of its very nature, however, and even though it comprises 
enough "evidence" in favor of a generalized principle that explains the 
workings of certain phenomena, a theory inevitably contains errors, 
since it's based upon incomplete data to begin with. It's therefore 
vulnerable to later theories through which investigators attempt to 
reduce or eliminate those errors. A continuous refining of detail takes 
place in the search for a final 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


81 


truth that can become "fact." (I also note that that truth being sought 
may end up as so abstract a quality that it loses its emotional and 
intellectual meanings for us, and moves out of our generalized 
perception. I'm noting, then, that we can analyze something right out of 
our own reality by ultimately declaring it to be impossible — when 
actually it, and other versions of it, continue to exist in related probable 
realities.) 

Considering the views of Seth, Jane, and me, reincamational and 
counterpart existences and their ramifications may enter in as portions 
of such a refining process as we attempt to search out the dimensions of 
consciousness. This may be true whether or not we believe in past and 
future lives, and/or counterparts, yet I can see no way such postulated 
manifestations can be "proven" at this time. 

I think the beliefs the three of us hold are very creative ones; we 
accept them on that basis; they are as good "proofs" as we can currently 
get, and offer their own answers by sparking us into new ways of trying 
to make sense out of our reality. Science and philosophy will not agree 
with any of this, I know — at least for the most part, for I've read that 
there's never an idea so wild that it can't find a home in the mind of 
some scientist or philosopher. Jane and I aren't so naive as to think that 
we can offer any hard proofs for what we believe, and certainly Seth 
doesn't worry about it. Not even when I play around with his ideas 
relative to quantum theory can such proof be found — yet I let Jane's 
"amazingly strong" will be the measuring and observing device that 
automatically causes "waves" of knowing or consciousness — in 
Framework 2, for example — to coalesce into the "particles" that make 
up the physical forms she perceives as her reality in Framework 1, 
either psychically from a distance or right here. 


■ESSAY _ “T . ______ __ . 

Monday, May 31, 1982 

Just over nine weeks have passed now since I brought my wife home 
from the hospital. And just last week (after another routine blood test) 
Jane's doctor again raised the dosage of the 



82 


Jane Roberts 


synthetic thyroid hormone she's taking, this time from 75 to 100 
micrograms per day. 

In the first essay I referred to Jane's unique combination of 
stubbornness, innocence, and mysticism, and in that respect nothing has 
changed. In spite of her horror at the medical practices and suggestions 
she's encountered, and in spite of her dismay at the physical damage the 
arthritis has caused in her temporal body, Jane will give up nothing until 
she — and/or her whole self — get out of the entire illness syndrome 
exactly what she wants to get. She has an incredible stubborn patience 
with physical life. This quality has sustained her throughout all of her 
challenges as well as her successes, and I think it must have been 
particularly important during her early frightening years with her 
mother, Marie. Her determination even shows somehow in photographs 
taken when she was of preschool age. Jane learned to refuse to strike 
back at the invalid Marie's rage and sarcasm, to inhibit her spontaneity 
and impulses, and so habits of repression entered in. Yet she was — and 
is — free of guile and sophistication. 

She learned of the concept of sin through her intense early 
involvement with the Roman Catholic church. It's easy to see how, in 
Jane's case at least, the church's teachings about sin began to grow as 
the innocent child started protecting her spontaneous natural mysticism 
— that prime attribute she'd chosen for exploration in this life. I don't 
think of her "sinful self' could have risen to such prominence without 
feeding upon those repressions, clamping down more and more within 
the psyche as the years passed, continuing its misguided but "well- 
meaning attempt to protect the creative self ... to keep a hand of 
caution on its course lest the centuries of men's belief in sin carried a 
true weight that I shared but could not comprehend." And so, of couse, 
the sinful seifs own overreactions, although carried out without 
"malice," became themselves a portion of Jane's long-range learning 
challenges this time. 

Until she became so ill that she was practically forced to go into the 
hospital, I'd always felt that my wife's single-minded yet literal focus of 
intent was capable of lasting however long it took to reach a particular 
goal — whether for five minutes or fifty years. Her illness led me to 
question that premise, but now it's back in place. Jane may not be 
always conscious of what she wants as she confronts her own 
projections in physical reality, 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


83 


but strong portions of her psyche are (and I think this applies to 
everyone). 

When in the earlier days of our marriage I used to tell her that she 
had her "symptoms" regardless of what I thought or wanted, she would 
deny it. Yet I thought she did, and so I was driven to grope for larger 
understandings. 1 had to leam that if I shared a marriage in which my 
wife had developed a chronic illness, then certain portions of me had 
also participated in that joint creation. Eventually nothing made sense 
to me otherwise. I believe implicitly now that each one of us does 
create our own reality. "Interactions with others do occur, of course," 
Seth told us long ago, "yet there are none that you do not accept or 
draw to you by your thoughts, attitudes, or emotions." (In Chapter 1 of 
The Nature of Personal Reality, see the 613th session, for September 
11, 1972.) And Jane and I are still exploring, still searching — together 
— for the factors within those larger frameworks of existence which 
make qualities like illness possible and understandable. 

Throughout these essays I've been unable to go very far into most of 
the subjects Jane and I wanted to discuss, to do much more than 
approximate in words a welter of feelings and actions. There's much that 
I haven't even mentioned, so to that extent this record is quite 
incomplete. And regardless of whether our space and time are limited 
here, still it seems impossible to really penetrate to the deeper core of 
any subject or belief. Perhaps if Jane and I could do that, a great 
metamorphosis would take place: The closer we moved through 
probabilities toward All That Is, the more the tensions associated with 
the subject in question would transform themselves into profoundly 
joyous answers and challenges. 

I've hardly mentioned our dreams. As related to Jane's physical 
symptoms, they have remained largely unconscious phenomena: We 
knew all along that we were often having "symptom dreams," but didn't 
recall them consistently enough to be able to do much conscious work 
with them. That's still the case. Obviously, we made our choices in that 
respect long ago: As far as the deeply charged subject of Jane's illness 
was concerned, we decided to keep most of our dream work on 
intuitive and unconscious levels. We took from Framework 2, then, 
exactly what we wanted to. 

but that simple statement also means that our dream work 



84 


Jane Roberts 


relative to Jane's challenges has often been powerfully abetted by Seth 
in many of the 347 completely private and 159 partially private 
sessions he's given us since November 1965. Much of the fascinating 
and informative material in which Seth discussed various aspects of 
Jane's symptoms is generalized enough for publication, and could help 
others, but because of its very intense personal connotations it's a 
project we haven't started yet. (Not that I haven't presented excerpts 
from a few of those sessions in other Seth books.) 

There must be a vast amount of pertinent dream information ready 
for the tapping, however, and maybe with Seth's help Jane and I can 
eventually learn more about the undoubtedly therapeutic roles our joint 
and individual dreams have played as we contended with the challenges 
posed by her physical difficulties. Many questions arise: Even granting 
our personal reservations about influences being exerted within our 
current lives through past, future, as well as other present existences, 
what about exchanges on dream levels concerning Jane's symptoms 
between or among any of our reincamational selves, our counterpart 
selves, or various combinations of the two? How am I involved in any 
of these, and how are Jane's and my families — and reaching how many 
generations back in ordinary time? To what extent does Jane's physical 
infirmity mushroom into other probable realities through the dream 
state? 1 think that Jane herself can deal with many such questions; 
possibly tuning into them on her own, should she decide to, or through 
the mediation of her "psychic library." A book could automatically 
develop out of the investigation — even, I joked with Jane, a "world- 
view" book. 

As Jane wrote in Chapter 1 of The World View of Paul Cezanne: A 
Psychic Interpretation (1977): "Seth maintains that each of us forms a 
psychic world view, composed of our own ideas, feelings, and beliefs, 
as we encounter our private comer of reality." The world view of every 
creature that has ever lived continues to exist, and can be turned into 
under certain conditions. So can the psychic patterns of those now 
living, and even of those not yet bom. Yet none of this means that 
contact will be made directly with the creator of the world view in 
question — only the bank of experiences originated through that 
individual's unique version of reality. And since world views are far 
from being 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


85 


static, interactions and combinations involving all time periods take 
place among them constantly. 

Jane's book would be called The World View of Jane Roberts, of 
course. And, I thought, why not? If she could tune into the world views 
of the philosopher and psychologist William James, and the artist Paul 
Cezanne, why couldn't she do it for the writer and mystic Jane Roberts? 
The results would be even more intimate than those in James and 
Cezanne. A work like that would furnish invaluable clues concerning 
her redemption, on many levels, and mine as well. 

The morning after showing her this material, 1 asked Jane what she 
thought about such a book. "I don't like to talk about it," she said, "but 
I've been potting around with the idea — getting some thoughts about 
something like that. But I'd rather not discuss it." 

"Okay," I said. I was pleasantly surprised by her reaction, for her 
reluctance to talk about a certain subject often was a sign that she'd end 
up doing something creative with it. 

Actually, of course, each second of any creature's life represents a 
creative act of the keenest sort, for it signals that physical entity's 
decision to continue living in physical terms. I think Jane has made 
some remarkable gains since leaving the hospital. Our friends all tell 
her she looks better each time they see her. She has beautiful clear skin. 
(Irish skin, I joke with her, although she's really but a quarter Irish.) She 
has additional freedom of movement in various joints, such as her knees 
and hips, although she's far from being able to walk. She can now type 
— if rather awkwardly — perhaps half a page of copy per day. "During 
those frightening-enough hospital episodes I learned under combat 
conditions, so to speak, how to trust my body," she wrote one day — an 
apt-enough analogy, I think. 

She's also done her first two colored-ink sketches, using one of the 4" 
x 6" watercolor pads I'd bought for her last year. In these sketches, with 
their simple but very effective patterns of line and primary colors, Jane 
somehow bypasses her everyday challenges and very clearly reflects 
her basically mystical view of the world. She does the same with the 
little poems she's worked upon, most of which she regards as being not 
only incomplete but quite inconsequential: "I wouldn't even type them 
up, like you did," she commented. Yet I like lines like: "Let the dirge be 



86 


Jane Roberts 


heard, sweeping all things before it," and: "I've developed a sense of 
death, when someone takes a few steps off the known path almost 
unknowing," and: "I breathed in the public: air and it became private." 
Jane also sings in Sumari occasionally, and has written down a few 
short songs in that "language" without translating them. I've been 
careful to collect for our own records the prose, sketches, poetry, and 
Sumari she's produced during this time of healing and testing. 

For Jane's situation continues to be a time of testing. Writing with 
her right hand is still quite difficult for her. She's made no effort to 
learn to write with her better-functioning left hand, as I suggested she 
do a couple of months ago, so I've dropped that idea. "But I could start 
another book tomorrow," she said, "only I don't know what good it 
would do. ..." 

She has a lesser degree of double vision these days, but still may 
require surgery to correct imbalances in her optic muscles. An 
experimental treatment that's just been announced, involving injections 
into certain eye muscles of a drug derived from the toxin of botulism, 
may ultimately benefit her; the procedure, which apparently has no side 
effects, can eliminate the need for surgery by encouraging the 
realignment of the eyes. Jane is still very much against drugs and 
surgery, though — even while she's well aware of the contradictions in 
her beliefs as she continues to take daily the synthetic thyroid hormone 
and the liquid salicylate medication prescribed by Dr. Mandali. In his 
session for April 16 (see the essay for the same date), Seth told us that 
on several occasions Jane's thyroid gland has "repaired itself," but we 
don't think that has fully happened yet this time. In a recent private 
session (for May 10) Seth told us: "The gland is activating itself by 
itself — off and on, so to speak, giving a sputtering effect. Overall, the 
body is exploring the best rhythm of metabolism, and fitting itself in 
with the medication." 

(Which makes us wonder: Just how will Jane's body let us know 
when it finally wants to divest itself entirely of the thyroid supplement? 
We're telling ourselves that that little challenge will automatically work 
itself out at the right time. We haven't posed the question to Seth.) 

The quotation from Seth just presented will certainly lead the reader 
to wonder about additional sessions we may have ac- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


87 


quired from him since April 16, and from Jane since April 20 (see the 
essays for those dates). The answer is that we've held 13 more sessions 
— 4 of them given by Jane "herself," and 9 by Seth speaking through 
her. The last session in that baker's dozen was delivered by Seth on 
June 7. Most of the sessions are rather short, and not all of them are 
strictly personal. For those that do concern us I've written lengthy 
notes, often recording the minutiae of our daily lives for our own 
reference. 

Even if those sessions can't be quoted in these essays because of the 
obvious space limitations, I can note that Jane and Seth each continued 
to develop the themes already laid down in the sessions that have been 
presented. What they really signify for the long term is (as I wrote in 
the essay for April 16) a continuing program of intense study for Jane 
and me — and yes, for Seth, too — as we seek to better understand our 
chosen commitments in our present physical lives. Our questions reflect 
those that everyone has, whether consciously or unconsciously — and 
among them is that eternally human "Why?" behind each event that we 
know. The material in the sessions is exhilarating, painful, enlightening, 
perceptive, frustrating, and maddening by turn — and sometimes, it 
seems, all of those things at once. We'd like to publish much of it, even 
though it's hardly all flattering, and even though some of it, because of 
our ordinary human limitations, may not be very useful in everyday life. 
For if the information arouses such mixed emotions in Jane and me, 
surely it will do so in others too, serving as an impetus or goad to leam 
more even while it highlights one's strengths and weaknesses. You 
create your own reality. The anger I'd felt at Jane and myself when she 
began recording her sinful-self material (see the essay for April 16) has 
long since dissipated. I won't claim that residues of it may not be buried 
within my psyche (and within Jane's), but it's very difficult to stay mad 
when one agrees with the simple but most basic and profound idea that 
you do create your own reality. 

At times Jane still becomes depressed, just as she still dozes in her 
chair. While at work in my own writing room I occasionally hear her 
talking to herself as she sits at her card table in the living room, just 
down the hall: I've learned that on such occasions, she's asleep and 
often dreaming aloud, solving the psychological equations continually 
arising among the levels of her 



Jane Roberts 


psyche as she pursues her chosen learning processes. I help her as 
much as I can. While I spend all of this time working on these essays 
for Dreams, I'm always afraid I'm leaving her alone too much. Jane 
does get lonely, she says. 

Of course these essays reflect our particular chosen stances in life, 
both with and without the Seth material. I know that to some we're sure 
to have appeared slow in putting to use much of the material, but in a 
most basic respect we're way ahead in the situation: If we hadn't almost 
instantaneously begun to encourage the flow of information from Seth 
when Jane started to express it some 18 years ago, and to write it down, 
then it wouldn't even exist — at least in its present form. So we do take 
credit for doing some things right. Learning experiences can show 
themselves in a vast number of ways, then, and independently of 
sequential time, too; and if Jane and I don't like certain aspects of the 
realities we've created, we can try to change them, together and 
separately. 

Already we've given up many old living patterns since Jane came 
home from the hospital, and in a strange way we now have the freedom 
to focus daily upon just a few main things. We've been reminded anew 
— more accurately, we've taught ourselves — that physical life itself is a 
wondrous medium of expression, and terrifically varied in that respect. 

Our joint concentration has become like a brilliant light directed 
upon first one event and then another. Because Jane still requires 
regular care, our sleeping patterns remain much more evenly divided 
between the daylight and nighttime hours (see the essay for April 16). 
Since I can no longer work for hours at a time on the Seth books, or 
with the Seth material, I'm training myself to "put out" copy in 
concentrated bursts of energy that are usually of an hour's duration, say. 

I work around these creative outpourings by ministering to my wife, 
running our house and the many errands connected with our daily 
living, handling our publishing affairs, seeing visitors — expected and 
unexpected — and trying to answer at least some of the mail, which is 
threatening to accumulate beyond control. Once again I'm becoming 
aware of my dreams, and so is Jane. I haven't been able to get back to 
painting since Jane left the hospital, and I've had to hire help to mow 
the grass. Nor have I resumed the midnight walks I used to take over 
the hilly streets of our neighborhood; 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


89 


I used to look forward to seeing the shadowy deer as they moved down 
into the streets from the woods north of the hill house. Jane's nurse now 
visits but twice a week, which is all that's necessary (my wife's decubiti 
are under control, for example). 

At the request of Dr. Mandali, a few days ago Jane underwent her 
routine phlebotomy, or bloodletting, here at the house. Today (on June 
18), the doctor informed us by telephone that as one result of the test 
we can increase Jane's thyroid hormone dosage from 100 to 125 
micrograms — a most welcome development, for we hope it will add to 
her daily energy. Yet there was unwelcome news, too — for the test also 
showed that the level of liquid salicylate medication (the aspirin 
substitute) in Jane's blood is too low. She's been taking that product four 
times a day for almost 16 weeks (see the first essay). Dr. Mandali 
instructed us to put Jane back on aspirin, to keep any arthritic pain and 
inflammation under control: "You can take up to sixteen tablets a day." 

Jane rejected that total at once, feeling it's far too high, and 
announced that she'll probably go back to her old routine of eight to ten 
aspirin a day. We're angry and dismayed. It's very unsettling for us to 
learn that the prescribed medication isn't doing its job after all. It is, I 
remarked somewhat bitterly, another sign of the frustrating, mixed 
results one must learn to expect, at least in some instances, from the 
imperfect practice of medicine. To treat rheumatoid arthritis with 
aspirin} We'd always found that incredible. Yet it's still the best way to 
go, Dr. Mandali said, even with the new anti-inflammatory, 
nonsteroidal drugs that the FDA (the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration) has released to the marketplace recently, for often they 
produce more side effects than aspirin. And her advice is reinforced by 
published material I've collected lately for our files. 

It seems that once again we must learn the hard way that in Jane's 
case any improvements we achieve are going to come from within 
ourselves (for I'm certainly as involved in and "responsible" for her 
illnesses as she is). That such feelings are rearoused in us at this time is 
hardly coincidental in view of our lifelong habits and belief systems; 
our tendencies toward secre-tiveness and our desires to be as self- 
sufficient as possible — even with Jane's very dependent situation. 
Different modes of behav- 



90 


Jane Roberts 


ior don't fit our chosen courses of action in physical life "this time." 
Once again I note that in my opinion Jane's dependency represents, at 
least in part, a search for a "redemption" that encompasses other 
motivations and realities than those concerned with "just" our temporal 
lives; that indeed, her impaired state grew out of her mystical nature 
itself (but was hardly caused by it!). 

So, although I think that Jane has made some "remarkable gains" 
during recent weeks, I also think that basically she has yet to resolve 
the entire issue of her illnesses — or even whether to continue physical 
life. Seth put it beautifully a couple of months ago in the session for 
April 12 — the first time Jane spoke for him since leaving the hospital — 
and I return to it again and again. See the essay for April 16: "The 
entire issue (of Jane's living) had been going on for some time, and the 
argument — the argument being somewhat in the nature of a soul facing 
its own legislature, or perhaps standing as a jury before itself, setting its 
own case in a kind of private yet public psychic trial. Life decisions are 
often made in just such a fashion. With Ruburt they carried a psychic 
and physical logic and economy. ..." 

Obviously, Jane's deliberations over whether to continue physical life 
are much easier to appreciate when she's depressed and/ or physically 
uncomfortable, and during those times I can sense the fluctuations in 
her examination of her psyche. Portions of her are still quite 
deliberately thinking it all over, I'm sure, although she doesn't mention 
this outside the session frameworks she provides for Seth and herself. 

"I probably didn't want to write any more," she dictated in her own 
session for May 27. " I feared I'd lost all inspiration — that 20 years of 
answers weren't enough, and that perhaps my life had no place to go if 
that were the case. I plan to work with the rest of that sinful-self 
material. . . ." 

But she hasn't begun to do so yet. 

I should add that I don't think Jane has started to "set. . . aside" the 
medical interpretation regarding her "arthritis situation," as Seth 
suggested she might do when he came through on April 12. (That 
session is presented in the essay for April 16.) Any decision Jane makes 
about altering the deeply set beliefs involved in her condition will 
require the cooperation of a number of portions of her psyche, 
including her sinful self, and it 




Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


91 


appears that at this time neither of us is ready to try achieving that kind 
of overall effect. Our fear of failure undoubtedly plays a strong part 
here. Ironically, Jane's sinful self is one of the main creators of and 
participants in her illness syndrome, so any beneficial changes she can 
bring about will first call for a major shift in the attitude of that very 
stubborn portion of her psyche. It will be a triumph indeed if and when 
we can create an alteration like that. And all of this presupposes that 
each of us will be ready to draw "new facts" into our daily lives from 
Framework 2. 

At my age (63), then, I'm learning once again that I can't live Jane's 
life for her, or protect her from the motivations of her own physical and 
psychic explorations and choices, no matter how much I may want to. 
Nor could she do that for me. On many levels that kind of psychic 
interference is quite simply ignored by the individual in question, and 
rightly so. Jane's determination would see to her own protection in any 
case. And her innate mystical nature must fully know and accept that 
the time, manner, and method of her physical death, whenever it occurs, 
is as much a part of her body's life as its life is. I deeply believe that her 
psyche would insist that she doesn't need any sort of basic protection by 
me (or anyone else) to begin with — only understanding. I live daily 
with the proposition that my wife is in the process of making profound 
decisions, and that once she's made them she'll respond accordingly 
both physically and mentally. 

In that sense Jane's whole self or entity accepts her actions 
completely, as part of the learning processes available to "it" through 
her individuality — nor do I mean it does so in any passive or remote 
sense at all, but in the most intimate, sensitive term s possible, and also, 
probably, in ways we cannot appreciate now. At that moment of joining 
with her whole self, whenever her "death" does take place, all will be 
resolved with the finest creativity and understanding, for I believe that 
Jane herself will certainly continue "living" as an individual. 

I also believe that these kinds of challenges — involving decisions 
about whether to continue physical life — have always existed for every 
creature on earth (just as they have for the earth itself as a living 
entity). Jane and I have no idea of how our personal story is going to 
work out, but we do want to tell it. 



92 


Jane Roberts 


Apropos of the material I've been covering in these pages, 1 want to 
close this essay with quotations from two sessions that I've always 
thought are among the best Seth has given. These sessions still live, and 
in them he reinforces the idea that each of us does create our own 
reality. Both can be found in Chapter 1 of Personal Reality. 

From Session 610 for June 7, 1972: "You always know what you are 
doing, even when you do not realize it. Your eye knows it sees, though 
it cannot see itself except through the use of reflection. In the same way 
the world as you see it is a reflection of what you are, a reflection not in 
glass but in three-dimensional reality. You project your thoughts, 
feelings, and expectations outward, then you perceive them as the 
outside reality. When it seems to you that others are observing you, you 
are observing yourself from the standpoint of your own projections." 

And from Session 613 for September 11, 1972: "Interactions with 
others do occur, of course, yet there are none that you do not accept or 
draw to you by your thoughts, attitudes, or emotions. This applies in 
each area of life. In your terms, it applies both before life and after it. 
In the most miraculous fashion you are given the gift of creating your 
experience." 


ESSAY 10 

Wednesday, June 23, 1982 

Finally, since I opened the first essay with a line from one of Jane's 
songs in Sumari, I think it appropriate to close the last essay with 
Sumari, too. 

This time, though, I have the translation of a whole composition to 
present. Jane spontaneously gave voice to her song yesterday afternoon 
while sitting in the glass-enclosed front porch of our hill house. The 
day was mild and sunny and breezy, and I'd opened all of the windows 
for her. The rich green lawn sloped down to the great maple and the 
sumac trees lining the road. I hadn't asked her to do a song for this last 
essay; she told me afterward that she hadn't realized I was that close to 
finishing it. (The whole series has taken much longer than I expected it 
to, though.) I only know that Jane began to sing in very melodi- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


93 


ous tones that flowed through the house. I easily heard her from my 
writing room. "Oh, your singing is so clear and sweet!" her visiting 
nurse had exclaimed the other day, when my wife had begun to sing 
while the nurse was changing the dressings on her decubiti. And that 
present clarity of voice, almost free of tremor, showed how much Jane 
has improved since returning home. How different her singing is now 
from that very mournful Sumari 

song she'd recorded last February, a few days before going into 
the hospital. "Fet my soul find shelter elsewhere," she'd lamented then. 

Jane didn't tape this new Sumari, though — which we regretted — for 
she wasn't able to get out of her chair to hunt for her recorder; I was too 
charmed just listening to her sing to think of a tape. She wrote down the 
translation as soon as she finished the song. When she read it to me I 
knew at once that it would go here, for a few words she certainly sang 
of the basic theme of these essays — of the sublime, immortal 
consciounesses of the earth and All That Is, of that loving redemption 
that consciousness always make possible somehow, somewhere, in the 
eternal private world of each of us, and that each of us always seeks: 

Sumari Healing Song 

While you were 
sleeping, all the 
cupboards of the 
earth were filled. 

Mother Earth 
sought out each 
need. 

While you were 
weeping, your tears 
fell as sweet rain 
drops on small 
parched hills that rise 
in worlds you cannot 
see, though you are 
known there. 



Jane Roberts 


While you were 
sleeping. 

Mother Earth 
filled all the 
cupboards of your 
flesh 

to overflowing. 

Not one atom went 

uncomforted 

in worlds that 

are yours, 

but beyond your 

knowing. 



Preface 

by Seth 

PRIVATE SESSION— September 13, 1979 

8:40 p.m. THURSDAY 

Preliminary Motes 

(Seth actually began his Preface for this book, Dreams, "Evolution," 
and Value Fulfillment, with the next, 881st session, which Jane deliv- 
ered for him 12 days later [on September 25], I chose to present this 
private session first because in it Seth offers certain information about 
Jane and me that I think applies to all of our work with him, through the 
session and booh, and to our own separate creative lives as well. Espe- 
cially do I like to interpret his material tonight as meaning that Jane is 
"a psychic or a mystic, "for to me, at least, this means that in this physical 
life she's chosen to penetrate as deeply as she can the depths of reality, or 
consciousness. 

Later in these notes I also plan to include, as a partial answer to many 
who have written us on the subject, material Seth gave on animal con- 
sciousness; this information came through just three days ago, in the 
878th session for September 10. In the meantime I want to tie together 
Dreams and the last Seth-Jane book, The Individual and the Nature of 
Mass Events. Seth completed his work on Mass Events about a month 
ago [on August 15], and a week later I began finishing my notes for it. 
This will require at least several months. At the same time I'll be taking 
Jane's dictation for Dreams. Along with my painting and dream 
recording, both of which I do in the mornings, all of these activities come 
together in just the kind of busy, creative life I greatly enjoy. As for Jane, 
she couldn't be more pleased to be so involved with all she's doing. 


95 



96 


Jane Roberts 


I wrote quite a bit in Mass Events about our publishing activities, 
just to show for the record how complicated certain aspects of the creative 
life can be as we juggled sessions, manuscripts, proofreading, and dead- 
lines [to list a few of our endeavors]; we "worked" at any time of the day 
or night — which didn't bother us at all. Since a lot of that kind of 
information was presented in Mass Events, Jane and I don 't intend for 
much of it in Dreams. Rather, after indicating in this Preface the 
continuity between the two books, I'll discuss briefly a few other subjects 
we feel deeply about. All of them are related to our work with the Seth 
material and Mass Events, however, and will, I'm sure, be reflected in 
Dreams. Beyond that, I have little idea of how many notes of Jane's and 
mine, or quotations from nonbook sessions, for example, we'll be adding 
to this book. 

Our lives do indeed seem to revolve around book projects and events! 
First, let me update the creative activities Jane was involved in while 
Seth and she were finishing Mass Events. 

As of last May, when she laid it aside to begin work on her own The 
God of Jane: A Psychic Manifesto, Jane had some 17 chapters in fairly 
good shape for her third Seven novel, Oversoul Seven and the Museum 
of Time. By now she's written 15 chapters, rough first draft, for God of 
Jane, and done notes for a number of others, out of a total of perhaps 
25; she knows she'll return to Seven when she's through with the much 
more personal God of Jane. Since she's finished her Seth part of the 
work for Mass Events, three days ago she began writing the 
Introduction to that book. She's been painting, answering mail, and 
writing poetry. Jane would especially like to do another book of poetry, 
since, she published Dialogues of the Soul and Mortal Self in Time way 
back in 1975. She talks about doing this rather often, then reads through 
the collections of poems she's built up over the years. She's even made a 
few notes about such a venture. [Personally, I just wish I had more time 
to sit quietly and reread some of her poetry. ] 

Right now our friend Sue Watkins, who lives better than an hour's 
drive upstate, is well past the 15th chapter of Conversations With Seth, 
the book she's writing about the ESP classes Jane held from September 
1967 to February 1975. Prentice-Hall will publish it. Jane hasn't seen 
Conversations yet. Next month she'll get together with Sue to go over it, 
then start writing the Introduction for the book soon afterward. 

Within a few days we expect to receive from Delacorte Press the first 
copies o/Emir's Education in the Proper Use of Magical Powers. 




Dreams. "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


97 


Emir is fane's children's book — or the one for "readers of all ages, " as 
she puts it. At the same time, Tam Mossman, Jane's editor at Prentice- 
Hall, is trying to find out whether the Dutch edition of Seth Speaks has 
been published. He thinks it has. As soon as Prentice-Hall receives its 
shipment of books from the Netherlands, Tam will forward the copies due 
us. The German-language edition of Seth Speaks was published in 
Switzerland four months ago [in May], and just three weeks ago we 
received our first fan letter from that country. The author wrote in 
English, and her appreciation of the work Jane and I are trying to do is 
amazingly similar to certain letters we receive from readers here at home. 
Even if that initial response was slow in coming [partly because of the 
language barrier, we think], we were glad to get it, for it indicated a 
commonality of interest in human potential, regardless of nationality. 
We expect the same kind of response from those who will seek out the 
Dutch Seth Speaks. We know the mail from European readers will very 
gradually increase, just as it did after Jane published The Seth Material 
in the United States in 1970.) 

(Late last night I stepped out onto the screened-in back porch of the 
hill house. Our black-and-white cat, Mitzi, followed me. We're having 
the house painted, and I could smell the acrylic odor. The woods on the 
hill in back of the house, echoed with the stridulations of the cicadas and 
katydids. When I went outside I made sure the porch door was latched so 
that Mitzi couldn't get out; she sat silhouetted against the light coming 
from the kitchen window as she watched me walk down the driveway. It 
was the natural time for her to be free, I thought. We'd had Mitzi spayed 
three weeks ago, when she was seven months old. [ Our veterinarian has 
told us we have to wait until early next year before Mitzi' s littermate, 
Billy, can be neutered; he has some more growing to do first.] Seth's 
recent material on animal consciousness has assuaged to some degree the 
guilt Jane and I feel at deceiving the innocent cats of their reproductive 
roles. We've also felt bad over our long-standing decision to keep them 
in the house; they can roam no farther than the front and back porches. 
Both porches are screened in down to the floor and furnish the only 
contacts Billy and Mitzi have with the outside environment. 

As I moved down the driveway I was thinking of what I wanted to 
cover next in these notes. The night was warm, heavily overcast, and 
mysterious: The streetlight down at the comer of our lot cast long shad- 
ows up the road running past the house and into the woods. The 
rhythmic, almost harsh sounds of the insects were strongly reminiscent of 



Jane Roberts 


the long camping seasons my father had treated his family to many years 
ago. [I remembered holding an amazingly delicate, green-colored katydid 
in my hand as a child. My father had taken my brother and me into the 
woods one night, at first tracking one of the insects by its sound, until 
finally he'd been able to illuminate with his flashlight the katydid as it 
perched on a branch at just the right height for us.] 

I'd looked for the shape of a rabbit last night, hopping across the silent 
road like an upright shadow casting a shadow, as I'd seen one do the 
other evening. I didn't see a rabbit, but I did hear a flight of geese 
approaching from the north above the cloud cover. And that growing 
cacophony, perhaps my favorite sound in all of nature, reminded me that 
I'd closed out Mass Events by writing about geese. I'd also mentioned 
the status of Three Mile Island, however, the nuclear energy generating 
plant located some 130 airline miles south of us, in Pennsylvania. Be- 
cause of a combination of mechanical failure and human error, one of 
the two reactors at TMI had come very close to a meltdown of the ura- 
nium fuel in its core. A potentially disastrous situation had developed, 
one that could have involved many thousands of people and several 
thousand square miles of land. It seemed incredible now that that acci- 
dent had taken place only six months ago. 

Enjoying the sounds of life in the mysterious nighttime, I intuitively 
understood that not only did I want to mention in this Preface the feelings 
Jane and I have about Three Mile Island as a technological and scien- 
tific entity, embodying man's attempts to extract new forms of energy [and 
yes, consciousness, in our joint opinion] from the far more basic and 
profound quality Seth calls All That Is; I also knew that I wanted to 
indicate how the very idea of nuclear energy, as an attribute of a national 
focus, compared with the situation in the Middle Eastern country of Iran. 
Iran is undergoing a revolution of a strongly religious, fundamentalist- 
Islamic character. [Islam means "peace, " by the way.] The force of Iran's 
upheaval makes the growing Christian fundamentalist movement in the 
United States seem tame indeed by comparison; therefore I want to con- 
centrate upon the Iranian dilemma rather than the religious conflicts in 
our own country. 

In Mass Events, along with TMI Seth had discussed the tragedy of 
Jonestown — where in November 1978 over 900 Americans had died [by 
murder or suicide] for a religious cause in faraway Guyana, South 
America. Last night I realized that in these notes for Dreams / also 
wanted to refer to the religious revolution in Iran while reminding the 
reader of the events in Jonestown. For to me, and to Jane also, I'm sure. 




Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


99 


Three Mile Island and Jonestown-Iran represent powerful extremes or 
directions in large-scale human behavior: certain aspects of religion and 
science seemingly at opposite poles of the human psyche, as it were. 

Just as though it had been waiting for the right moment last night, a 
screech owl began to sound its sorrowful descending cry in the black 
woods on the hill behind our house. The barking of the geese started to 
fade. At least from my viewpoint, each of nature's rhythmic signs implied 



a contradictory as at first they may seem to be. In Mass Events Seth spent 

continu considerable time discussing the deeper and very similar meanings 
ity, an behind both of those belief systems — or cults, as he called them — and 
inevita Jane and I hope he continues to do so in Dreams. Now it even seems to 
bility us that in Mass Events Seth began preparing us for Dreams long before 
and Jane and he ever mentioned that work by name. 

security Iran's fundamentalist Islamic orientation is directly opposed to the 
, that secular or worldly view of government espoused in Western lands. Hor- 
I've rendous as the situation at Jonestown turned out to be, with religious 
often fanaticism furnishing a framework for all of those deaths, I think it 
felt is obvious that developments in Iran are already far more serious. Iran is 
lacking an entire country, whereas Jonestown was one fragile settlement confined 
in our within the jungles of an alien land. Iran can "infect" other nations or 
all-too- peoples with an ancient religious force, or consciousness, if allowed to do 
human so. Nuclear power can do the same thing with a new scientific force that 
affairs can be even more devastating if not carefully "controlled" [in our terms], 
— this, To Jane and me these particular aspects of science and religion represent 
even the way large-scale events can escape their well-meaning creators and 
though literally take on lives of their own. And really, I thought, it could have 
I wrote hardly been an accident on consciousness's part that as the events at tiny 
in Mass Jonestown receded from world attention, the revolution in Iran began to 
Events dramatically increase. To me the religious correlations are obvious, 
that After six months, then, Three Mile Island is still "a closed enigma, " 

Jane as I wrote in finishing Mass Events — only now the costs for the repair 
and I and cleanup of its damaged reactor have been projected as being well 

are over $1 billion instead of the $40 million to $400 million of just a 
aware, month ago, and into many years of "time" instead of just four. TMI has 
of become the unfortunate symbol of our unprepared experimentation with 

course, 
of all 
the 
"good 
things" 
we 

humans 

have 

constru 

cted in 

our 

mass 

reality. 

Actuall 

y, i 

thought 

, our 

concept 

s of 

religion 

and 

science 

aren't 

as 



100 


Jane Roberts 


a nature that contains all sorts of surprises for us; especially when, as Seth 
maintains, each of those "surprises, " once created, becomes conscious in its 
own way. [I do believe that this kind of thinking is totally unacceptable to most 
businessmen, as well as generally to the public they serve, the irony here being 
that neither businessman or scientist can explain what that fantastic nuclear 
energy — or any energy, for that matter — really is. In the frontmatter, see the 
first of the four quotations from Seth; the one taken from a private session 
given just two months ago: "All energy contains consciousness (underlined). . . 

. A recognition of that simple statement would indeed change your world. "] 

I'd rather write about the nature that Jane and I live amid here at the hill 
house, I suppose, but it seems that in the beginning each great secret we 
uncover in our world is a "natural" one. Nuclear energy was supposed to 
transform life on our planet — until we began to encounter unexpected 
challenges with safety, the disposal of radioactive wastes, corrosion, cost, poor 
workmanship, aging equipment, and many other obstacles. Nuclear energy's 
science and technology had always been isolated from most of us. Very 
gradually its ambience actually became threatening and psychologically 
"unnatural. " In the case of Three Mile Island, that energy, that consciousness, 
balanced on the edge of running out of our mundane control. 

If the hassles surrounding TMI have engendered forces of a scientifically 
oriented consciousness, then, certainly those in Iran have released a very 
strong religiously oriented consciousness. Religious drives of whatever nature 
are much more comprehensible to us than scientific ones: I think it quite safe to 
note that in ordinary terms our species began struggling with religious 
expression long before it began recording history. This year [1979], Iran has 
turned into a land in which all Western nations — but particularly the United 
States — have become anathema. Iran's religious leaders actually run the 
country now, operating behind a weak secular and probably temporary 
government appointed by its Western-leaning and departed leader before he 
fled his country last January. [Now, looking tired and ill, he travels the world 
with his expensive entourage, looking for a safe place to live after leading 25 
years of savage oppression in his homeland.] 

Within the context of Islamic culture, law is intrinsically religious law; 
there is no real separation of state and church unless by force. Iran seethes. 
Many hundreds have died in bitter internal factional disputes. Under the 
clergy this year several hundred others have already been executed as Islamic 
law is enforced, and thousands more are to die. Last 



Dreams, "Evolution, "and Value Fulfillment 


101 


February some 70 Americans were taken hostage when a mob of Marxist- 
led Iranian fedayeen [or sacrificers] overran the United States embassy 
in Iran's capital, Tehran. The captives were quickly freed by secular- 
negotiators loyal to the Iranian clergy, but certainly that kind of virulent 
anti-Americanism can happen again. Our citizens began a large-scale 
evacuation of Iran by air, as did those of several other Western countries. 
The official and unofficial call has gone out from millions of Iranian 
throats to purge the country of all Western thought. . . . 

The religious and scientific mass consciousnesses released in Iran and 
the United States respectively reach far beyond their countries of origin, 
obviously. Indeed, I think those attributes of All That Is must have long 
ago formed strong portions of the psychic atmosphere that, one might say, 
encircles the earth and affects all below. Those forces or consciousnesses 
must also constantly replenish themselves: Iran's religious leaders de- 
voutly nourish their country's hatred for the United States, while here at 
home no less than six separate teams or commissions have begun investi- 
gations — on private, state, and federal levels — of what went wrong at 
Three Mile Island. Many younger people [and not only in the United 
States] have become very fatalistic over the possibility of nuclear accident, 
or worse, war. Some even refuse to bring children into a world they 
believe their elders have created for them [in those terms]. And most older 
people avoid seriously considering what nuclear war would really mean 
for them, out of fear closing their minds to certain aspects of that psychic 
atmosphere. 

Jane and I try to keep in mind Seth's ideas, as well as our own, 
concerning the great challenges our species has chosen to deal with these 
days, but I must admit that we often have trouble doing so. It seems to us 
that even if they privately agreed with us, our world leaders would have 
even more trouble implementing such thinking, for in their positions of 
"power" they're quite locked into their national statuses by centuries of 
custom and history. To initiate truly original and/or revolutionary forms 
of beneficial governmental and mass behavior would be extraordinarily 
difficult. 

In my opinion these are hardly predictions, but instead very conserva- 
tive projections of already well-established phenomena: I don't for a 
minute think that any country, let alone our species as a whole, will give 
up on nuclear power. Nor will Iran, or the United States, or a number 
of other nations, dispense with fundamentalist religion of whatever kind. 
I believe that those particular aspects of scientific consciousness and 
religious consciousness will be with us for a very long time, for in our 



102 


Jane Roberts 


chosen earthly reality a larger consciousness — and, ultimately, All That Is — 
has opted for much long-range exploration of those two closely related 
portions of itself In our probability we can create both very transcendent and 
very painful portions of that dual exploration. I think those particular aspects 
of mankind’s search for answers will grow ever more powerful for a number of 
years, until their very excesses finally lead to their "evolution " into forces that 
are much more controlled and compassionate and understanding. 

In our terms, then, it's certainly foolish for scientists to expect that the 
peoples of the world are simply going to dispense with religion just because 
scientists want them to, calling them ’deluded" or worse. It's just as foolish for 
those who are religious, even though they outnumber the scientists by far, to 
expect most scientists to embrace religion, to surrender their agnosticism or 
atheism, to give up their mechanistic, reductionist views of life — their attempts 
to use a series of "logical" steps to reduce the human being, say, to his or her 
ever-lower components, right down to the atomic level. [God is, therefore, 
unnecessary.] And this, of course, even though the scientists cannot explain 
where the universe we know came from, or where "it" may be going. They can 
only speculate about such massive concepts via theories like the currently 
popular "big bang" origin of the universe, with all of its implied consequences, 
or through the much lesser-known "inflationary model. " Nor can scientists tell 
us, any better than the religious-minded can, what life itself is, or where "it" 
came from, or where "it" may be going. 

I vividly remember that in the last chapter [7] of Mass Events Seth 
remarked: "The universe is — and you can pick your own terms — a spiritual or 
mental or psychological manifestation, and not, in your usual vocabulary, an 
objective manifestation. " [See the 855th session for May 21, 1979. I find it 
amazing that Jane came through with that session only four months ago.] 

The feelings Jane and I have for animals almost automatically lead us to 
associate at least some of the implications of Seth 's statement with another one 
he'd given earlier in Mass Events. / remember it equally well, and find it 
fascinating. In Chapter 5, see the 832nd session for January 29, 1979: "Nature 
in all of its varieties is so richly encountered by the animals that it becomes 
their equivalent of your structures of culture and civilization. They respond to 
its rich nuances in ways impossible to describe, so that their 'civilizations' are 
built up through the interweavings of sense data that you cannot possibly 
perceive. " 

I often consider those insights when observing both the wild and do- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


103 


mesticated animal life, as well as the bird life, around the hill house. 
Much earlier in these preliminary notes I wrote that we'd had our cat 
Mitzi spayed almost three weeks ago [on August 27, to be exact], and 
that her littermate, Billy, is to be neutered early next year. I mentioned 
the guilt Jane and I feel because we're depriving the cats of their repro- 
ductive roles in life, and because we don't let them run free in the 
environment. I also noted that in a session on animal consciousness Jane 
held just three days ago, Seth had to some extend assuaged our feelings 
on such questions, and that his information will be of value to others. 
The session, the 878th, was held on September 10, 1979, and it began 
at 9:07 p.m. Monday— just five regular sessions after Seth had com- 
pleted his work on Mass Events, and three before he began Dreams. 
Earlier that day I'd made a wadded-up paper ball for Mitzi to play with. 
Using her lightning-quick reflexes, she kept knocking it around the living 
room and beneath Jane's rocker as my wife went into trance, then began 
to speak. Here are session excerpts:) 

Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Observing the antics of your Mitzi gives me an excuse to begin the 
topic of the evening: animal consciousness. 

I want to begin simply by having you question some concepts taken 
quite for granted — to question much (emphatically). 

(Pause.) It is somewhat fashionable to see man as always nature's 
despoiler, as the destructive member of nature's family, or even to 
consider him apart from nature, who was given nature as his living 
grounds. 

It is somewhat fashionable to see man as . . . the creature who dirties 
his own nest, and I am not condoning much of man's behavior in that 
regard. However, there are other issues, and questions seldom asked. 
You ignore the fact that [overall] the consciousness of animals has its 
own purposes and intents. It is true that animals are slaughtered under 
the most cruel of circumstances for human consumption — for then 
(underlined) they are treated simply as foodstuff. 

(Pause.) Buffaloes do not roam as they did before. There are 
thousands of farm-bred animals, however [and have been], all 
throughout civilization, alive for a time, well-cared-for for a time — 
animals who in usual terms would not exist except for man's 
"gluttonous" appetite for meat. That is the way the issue is often 



104 


Jane Roberts 


considered. It seldom occurs to anyone that certain forms of animal 
consciousness came in physical form [by choice], that certain species 
are prized by man and protected, or that the consciousnesses of such 
animals had anything at all to do with such an [overall] arrangement. 

You cannot say that such animals came out ahead of the bargain, but 
you can say that the species of man and certain species of animals 
together formed an arrangement. . . that did have benefits for both. Man 
is more a part of nature than he realizes, and in the greater realm of 
activity he cannot take any ... actions with which the rest of nature does 
not agree for its own reasons. 

Remember here other material given about cellular communication, 
for example, and the vast web of intercommunication that unites all 
species. Of course animals can communicate with man, and of course 
man can communicate with other species — with all species. Such 
communication has always gone on. Man cannot afford to become 
aware of such communication at this point, simply because your entire 
culture is based upon the idea of the animals' "natural" subordinate 
position. The men who slaughter animals cannot afford to treat those 
animals as possessors of living consciousnesses. 

(Long pause at 9:26.) There is, beneath it all, an important unity, a 
sense of communion, as one portion of earth's living consciousness dies 
to insure the continued life of all nature. That natural sacrament, 
however, turns into something else entirely when the gift is so 
misunderstood, and when the donor is treated so poorly. . . . 

Basically [many farmers love] animals for themselves, and delight in 
their ways — but by itself "delighting in animals" is not considered 
particularly virile enough. In your society, if you like animals you must 
not like them for themselves, but for other reasons. If you want to be 
with animals then you must become a farmer, or a veterinarian, or a 
cattleman, or whatever. . . . 

Many animals enjoy work and purpose. They enjoy working with 
man. Horses enjoyed the contributions they made to man's world. They 
understood their riders far more than their riders understood them. 
Many dogs enjoy being family protectors. There are deep emotional 
bonds between men and many species of animals. There is emotional 
response. Dolphins, for example, 




Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


105 


respond emotionally to man's world. The animals on a farm are 
emotionally aware of the overall psychological content of the farmer's 
life and [that of each member of] his family. . . . 

Consciousness is filled with content — any kind of consciousness. 
[The farmer's] animals understand that in a certain fashion he is a 
midwife, responsible for some of their births. Food comes from his 
hands. The animals understand, on their own, that life on any terms that 
are physical ends with death — that the physical properties must be 
returned to the earth from which they came. . . . 

(Pause at 9:45.) [Animals] do not blame [human beings] for 
anything. If as a species you really found yourselves communicating 
with the animals, you would have an entirely different culture, a culture 
that would indeed bring about an alteration of consciousness of the 
most profound nature. 

You have forgotten, conveniently, how much you learned from all of 
the animals, as I have mentioned in past sessions. You learned a good 
deal of medicine from watching animal behavior: You learned what 
plants to avoid, and which to cultivate. You learned how to rid yourself 
of lice by going into the water. You learned social behavior by watching 
the animals. At one time you could identify with animals, and they with 
you to a remarkable degree. They have been your teachers, though they 
did not choose your path. Obviously, you could not have gone your way 
[as a species] had it not been for the animals. 

Domesticated animals have their own reasons for choosing such a 
state. It is, for example, usual enough to think that your cats (Billy and 
Mitzi) should ideally run outside in the open, because in the wild that is 
what cats would do. 

Cats in the wild were, in those terms of time, exploring one kind of 
nature. In that kind of nature, with a natural population taken care of in 
the environment, there would be far fewer cats than there are now. Your 
cats would not exist. Why does it seem antinatural, even slightly 
perverse, for a household cat to, say, prefer fine cat food from a can, 
when it seems that he should be eating mice, perhaps, or dining upon 
grasshoppers? The household cat is exploring a different kind of nature, 
in which he has a certain relationship to human consciousness, a 
relationship that changes the reality of his particular kind of 
consciousness. 

Your cats are as alive in all ways inside of the house as out. 



106 


Jane Roberts 


They understand their relationship with your human reality. They enjoy 
contributing in your life as much as any wild animal enjoys being a part 
of its group. Their consciousnesses lean in a new direction, feel about 
the edges of concepts, sense openings of awareness of a different kind, 
and form alliances of consciousness quite as natural as any other. 

(10:01. Now Seth discussed a couple of other questions Jane and I 
had, then ended the session at 10:27 p.m. 

Inevitably, Seth's specific references to cats had reminded me of certain 
other intriguing passages of his in Mass Events. I found I'd presented 
them therein as excerpts from nonbook sessions in Chapter 6: See Note 2 
for the 840th session. Both of the following quotations from that material 
contain vast implications — and should these ideas ever become well 
known, Jane and I feel, they'll be sure to arouse the deep opposition of a 
number of vested interests. 

From Session 837 for February 28, 1979: "There is no such things 
as a cat consciousness, basically speaking, or a bird consciousness. In 
those terms, there are instead simply consciousnesses that choose to take 
certain focuses. " 

From Session 838 for March 5, 1979: "If there is no consciousness 
'tailored' to be a cat's or a dog's, then there is no prepackaged, predes- 
tined, particular consciousness that is meant to be human, either. . . .") 

(Actually, it's taken me a long time — a little over thee years — to 
round out these preliminary notes for the session that follows. When I 
finished them, then, it was nighttime again, September 23, 1982, late, 
and once again I stepped off the back porch of the hill house for some 
fresh air [Mitzi didn't watch me this time.] Much has taken place in 
Jane's and my lives since 1979, as it has for everyone else, but here in 
the light of the comer streetlight the scene outside our place was just as 
magical and mysterious as ever That's what we love about it. In the 
warm evening the silent road still ran uphill past the house and into the 
woods. The cicadas and the katydids still sounded their hypnotic rhythms, 
I've heard geese often lately, moving south in noisy waves, and we've 
had deer in our driveway several times. I looked for rabbits or 'coon or 
deer now, but didn't see any of those creatures. 

Once more, as I've done often in recent years, I expressed the hope to 
myself that in another probable reality very similar to this one I opted for 
the outdoor life in a much stronger way — even to living outside night 
and day for most of the year. I must be doing so right now! In that 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


107 


probable life I use a tent sometimes, but I cook and sleep outside as much 
as possible, except in the worst weather. What a different life! I'm still a 
painter, I often think, but perhaps not a writer. I might be a Milton 
Avery or a Paul Cezanne type of artist. More and more I've come to 
admire — revere, even — the single-minded, childlike devotion artists like 
Avery and Cezanne had for their art. Not that I want to copy Cezanne, 
for instance [I couldn't even if I wanted to], but in that other reality I 
too chose to live the natural life in a more naive or clear-eyed manner — 
to sublimate myself before nature while at the same time hying to become 
master of whatever means of expression I can achieve. 

How strange a desire to have in these days of scientific and religious 
turmoil, of computers and nuclear debate and space technology. It's 
almost like trying to wish oneself back into an earlier, seemingly less 
complicated time. That, surely, would be an illusory goal! But no matter 
what we may accomplish as a species, or how far we may travel, in those 
terms we started out utterly dependent upon our earth, with its fantastic 
variety of resources and life forms. That sublime framework still exists 
for us in all of its great beauty, and I want to always return to it: We 
create our human version of it each day, and I think that even now we've 
hardly begun to understand what we are and have. I've come to believe 
that the predominantly outdoor life would give me a certain understand- 
ing of our temporal and spiritual worlds impossible to grasp otherwise, 
and that my painting would inevitably mirror that greater comprehen- 
sion. Sometimes I simply yearn for that way of living. Of course, what 
I'm really stressing here is living the independent life as much as possible 
within our ever-more-complicated national and world cultures. But we 
all have our dreams. 

Even though she values the idea of independence as much as I do, the 
idea of such a life doesn't appeal to Jane at all. Not that she didn't take 
to camping, for instance, when I introduced her to it after we married in 
1954. She grew up in a quite different physical and psychological envi- 
ronment, however, and the outdoor, athletic life was not a part of that 
ambience. But she more than proved her own intuitive grasp of nature, 
and of my own desires, by producing for me as a Christmas present [© 
1977] her excellent book, The World View of Paul Cezanne: A Psychic 
Interpretation. . . . 

Now here is the private session listed at the beginning of these advance 
notes — the one I chose to present just before Seth's actual Preface for 
Dreams. The opening notes that follow are pretty much as I wrote them 
before Jane began delivering the session on Thursday evening at 8:40, 



Jane Roberts 


September 13, 1979. [That night, however, I could do no more than 
barely indicate the "extra" material I've just finished giving, although 
even then I knew much of what I wanted to cover ]) 

(Jane had been so relaxed, so physically at ease yesterday — as she has 
been often lately — that we'd passed up our regularly scheduled Wednes- 
day night session. At the same time she's been extremely inspired and 
creative recently, working on her own God of Jane and the Introduction 
for Seth's Mass Events, turning out many pages of excellent material for 
those works. Even though she was again very relaxed today, she was also 
active writing. In fact, after supper she produced two more pages of notes 
that she "picked up" from Seth on his new book Dreams, "Evolution," 
and Value Fulfillment. 

We held the session in the living room, as usual. Jane yawned, then 
laughed as we waited for Seth to come through. "I keep trying to change 
that title, though. ..." After a prolonged juggling of titles and themes on 
her own, she'd finally acquired the book's title directly from Seth some 
seven weeks ago, or shortly before July 30, 1979; see the closing note for 
Session 869 in Chapter 10 o/Mass Events. "1 just think that 'value 
fulfillment' is a strange phrase to use in a book title, "Jane said. "It's too 
unfamiliar — I'm afraid it'll confuse the reader. I keep thinking of some- 
thing simpler, like Dreams and Evolution: A Seth Book. And without 
'Evolution ' being in quotes, too. Or how about Dreams, Evolution, and 
Creativity . . .?" 

I've been expecting Seth to begin Dreams at any time. From him 
we've derived the idea that "value fulfillment" represents the creative 
development of hard-to-define values which increase the quality of life 
for any being, whether human or not — and not only in moral terms. 

Jane had suggested an earlier session, although I hadn't really thought 
she'd hold one at all. My only recent concern has been that she not let the 
sessions go on a regular basis just because I'm working on the notes for 
Mass Events. 

"I think I'm about ready. ..." After she went so easily into trance, 
Jane's delivery was very active and energetic — in most definite contrast 
to the near-bleary-eyed state she'd been in before Seth began speaking. 
This is a transformation that I've seen happen often: that familiar but 
always exciting and mysterious influx of energy andlor consciousness.) 

(With amusement:) Comments. 

("Okay. Good evening, Seth. ") 

(Pause.) The two of you thought of yourselves specifically as a 



Dreams, "Evolution, ' and Value Fulfillment 


109 


writer — or rather a poet — and an artist before our sessions began. I 
would like to clear up some important points. 

You identified, primarily now, as a poet and an artist because those 
designations, up to that time, seemed most closely to fit your abilities 
and temperaments. Ruburt's 1 writing set him apart. Your painting set 
you apart. These were recognizable, tangible proofs of creativity. You 
therefore identified with elements, characteristics, and traditions that 
seemed to suit you best. 

To some extent you had your own niches, recognizable by society 
even if they were relatively (underlined) unusual. You did not know that 
there was a deeper, older, or richer tradition — a more ancient heritage 
— to which you belonged, because you found no hint of it in your 
society. It seemed at different times since our sessions began that there 
were disruptive conflicts. For example: Was Ruburt a writer or was he a 
psychic? Were you an artist, or weren't you? What about the writing 
you did — both for our books, and the writing that you sometimes plan 
to do on your own? 

Those kinds of conflicts can only exist in a society in which the 
entire concept of creativity is segmented, in which the creative 
processes are often seen as inner assembly lines leading to specific 
products: a society in which the very nature of creativity itself is largely 
ignored unless its "products" serve specific ends. 

Ruburt was correct in his introductory notes (for Mass Events,) today 
— about the poet's long-forgotten abilities, and his role. Ruburt has 
been a poet all of the time in the most profound meaning of that term. 
For the poet did not simply string words together, but sent out a syntax 
of consciousness, using rhythm and the voice, rhyme and refrain as 
methods to form steps up which his own consciousness could rush. 

(8:53.) Early artists hoped to understand the very nature of creativity 
itself as they tried to mimic earth's forms. Poetry and painting were 
both functional in ways that I will describe in our next book 
(humorously, elaborately casual), and "esthetic," but poetry and 
painting have always involved primarily man's attempt to understand 
himself and his world. The original functions of art — meaning poetry 
and painting here specifically — have been largely forgotten. The true 
artist in those terms was always primarily — in your terms again — a 
psychic or a mystic. 



110 


Jane Roberts 


His specific art (pause) was both his method of understanding his own 
creativity and a way of exploring the vast creativity of the universe — 
and also served as a container or showcase that displayed his 
knowledge as best he could. 

That is the heritage that both of you follow, and have followed 
faithfully. It has an honored tradition. Also involved is, as Ruburt 
correctly picked up from me, a group of accomplishments that we will 
call the psychological arts. You are involved in those also. 

(To me:) I want you to specifically understand that there is and can 
be no conflict, for example, between your writing and painting, for in 
the most basic of ways they represent different methods of exploring 
the meaning and the source of creativity itself. 

The sessions I give you, in usual (uncierlined) terms, are a new 
extension of that creativity — but again, that extension has an ancient 
heritage. (To me again:) Your own writing, of course, is art. It is also a 
method of perceiving and understanding creativity. It is a method of 
learning that redoubles upon itself, and you are uniquely equipped 
(pause) to discover comprehensions from a standpoint that is most 
unusual. 

Explore, for example, your own feelings toward me: whether or not 
they have changed through the years, how much I seem to be myself, or 
part Jane, or part Ruburt, or part you, or part Joseph, or whatever. 
Realizing that you are in the position you wanted to be [in], and 
realizing that your abilities are not in conflict with each other, nor you 
with them, will automatically fulfill and develop all of those abilities, in 
a new kind of overall creativity that is itself beyond specifics. 

Now: When Ruburt begins to trust himself, as he has, the physical 
(arthritic) armor loosens. The creative abilities become even more 
available, hence his new creativity, and the new' physical steps he has 
taken. They all go together. 

He believed in the specific nature of the creative self, so that it could 
only be trusted in certain areas. He believed he needed strong mental 
barriers as well as physical ones, set up against his own spontaneity. He 
is beginning to understand that the spontaneous and creative aspects of 
personality are the life-giving ones. They can and must be trusted. He 
knows now he does not have to slow down, and that relaxation leads to 
motion. 

(9:09.) He did indeed pick up from me a partial list of the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


111 


subject matters to be covered in our new book — which will be called 
Dreams, "Evolution, " and Value Fulfillment. 

(Pause.) The book will necessarily of course include much material 
on the true nature of creativity and its uses and misuses by civilizations. 
You do not have to fight to trust the thrust of your own life. That thrust 
is always meant to lead you toward your own best fulfillment, in a way 
that will benefit the species as well. 

When you trust the thrust of your own life, you are always 
supported. Tell Ruburt that. 

I want you both, then, to understand that in the greater light of 
creativity, understanding its true meaning, you have taken the right 
course, and therefore drop from your minds any lingering ideas of 
conflict and doubt. Such a stand will automatically clear up all 
problems involving things like taxes, sex roles, or whatever — on both 
of your parts. 

You (both) are studying the nature of creativity as few others have 
done or can do — and that is bound to make possible new creative 
frameworks, and to offer new solutions to situations that cause 
difficulty only within smaller frameworks. 

Do you have questions? 

("No. Jane's been doing great lately, and I'm very pleased to see that. ") 

He should — meaning predictive, he will. End of session. 

("Thank you. ") 

A fond good evening. 

("Good night, Seth. ") 

(9:16 p.m. And right at the end of the session, Jane's head flopped 
down loosely as she quickly returned to the very relaxed state she'd been 
in before speaking for Seth.) 


NOTE. Private Session, September 13, 1979 

1. Those who are familiar with the Seth material know this, so I ask 
their forbearance while I reproduce for "new" readers Note 3 for 
Session 679, in Volume 1 of "Unknown" Reality: 

Almost always Seth refers to Jane by her male entity name, 
"Ruburt" — and so "he," "his," and "him." 

To sum up Seth's somewhat amused comments in the 12th session 
for January 2, 1964: "Sex, regardless of all of your fleshy takes, is a 
psychic phenomenon, merely certain qualities which 



112 


Jane Roberts 


you call male and female. The qualities are real, however, and permeate 
other planes as well as your own. They are opposites which are 
nevertheless complementary, and which merge into one. When I say as 
I have that the overall entity [or whole self] is neither male or female, 
and yet refer to [some] entities by definitely male names such as 
'Ruburt' and 'Joseph' [as Seth calls me], I merely mean that in the 
overall essence, the [given] entity identifies itself more with the so- 
called male characteristics than with the female." 


SESSION 881— September 25, 1979 

8:50 p.m. TUESDAY 

(Saturday afternoon Jane finished typing the final version of her Intro- 
duction for Mass Events, and yesterday morning I mailed it to Tam 
Mossman at Prentice-Hall. 

Today my wife was once again very much at ease for most of a day — 
so much so, in fact, that she slept several times. Many beneficial muscular 
changes appear to be taking place in her body. After supper I suggested 
that if she had a session tonight Seth could comment upon her current 
series of relaxations. At 8:30 she called me out of my writing room. Now 
she was nervous, for she felt that Seth was ready to dictate his Preface for 
Dreams. 

/ especially liked the first sentence Seth offered for his latest book. He 
promised something Jane and I could really focus upon ... an exciting 
yet thoughtful time of "work" and new information. Quietly, with many 
pauses, a few of which are indicated:) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

(7 laughed. "Good evening, Seth. ") 

Preface: This book will be my most ambitious project thus far. 
Period. 

It may be said by some that any book at all is an ambitious endeavor, 
when it originates from a psychological source funder lined! so far 
divorced from your ordinary ideas of creativity. It is one thing, for 
example, for a physical writer to produce a manuscript — and even that 
kind of creativity involves vast and hidden psychological maneuvers 
that never appear in the manuscript itself. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


113 


As most of my readers know, I make no claims of now having a 
physical personhood. (Pause.) I do claim an independent reality at 
another level of existence. My status and origins seem strange only 
because you have understood so little about your own origins. I am 
beginning this book this evening. I have already given the title, and at 
another level of consciousness Jane Roberts was able (12 days ago, for 
example) to perceive some glimpses of some of the subject matter that 
will be included here. So far, however, physically there is only the page 
of paper upon which Robert Butts is writing down these words I speak. 

Someday, in terms of time, there will be a thick book. Although the 
manuscript does not yet exist in a physical book, the book itself, the 
ideas and words, are in the most important fashions quite real now. 
Certain qualities are implied in all kinds of creativity that are generally 
overlooked, and so they are not apparent. The kind of creative 
procedures we are involved in can serve to bring some of those 
qualities to light, and to shed illumination upon many aspects of the 
human psyche that usually remain hidden. 

I speak through Ruburt — or through Jane Roberts, if you prefer. 
Ruburt has his own creative abilities, and uses them well, and it is to a 
large extent because of those abilities that our contact first took place 
(in December 1963). Scientists like to say that if you look outward at 
the universe, you look backward in time. That statement is only 
partially true. When you move inward through the psyche, however, 
you do begin to thrust, in your terms, "backward" toward the origins of 
existence. Your creative abilities do not simply allow you to paint 
pictures, to tell or write stories, to create sculpture or architecture. They 
do not simply provide you with a basis for your religions, sciences, and 
civilizations. They are your contact with the source of existence itself. 

(Jane took a long pause in trance at 9:10.) Give us a moment. . . . 
(Long pause.) They provide the power that allows you to form a belief 
system to begin with. 

(Pause.) Now: While you believe that consciousness somehow 
emerges from dead matter, you will never understand yourselves, and 
you will always be looking for the point at which life took on form. You 
will always have to wonder about a kind of mechanical birth of the 
universe — and it will indeed seem as if 



114 


Jane Roberts 


your own world was made up of the spare parts that somehow fell 
together in just such a fashion so that life later emerged. 

You are filled with questions about when and where the various 
species appeared, and how the rocks were formed, when some reptiles 
grew wings, when some fish emerged from the oceans and learned to 
breathe air, and you are bound to wonder what happened in the times in 
between. 

How many reptiles tried for wings, for example, and failed, or could 
not fly — or how many millions of reptiles did it take, and how many 
trials, before the first triumphant bird flew above the landscape? How 
many fish died with only half-formed lungs, who were too far from the 
water's edge to dip again beneath the waves? (More intently now:) Or 
how many fish flopped backward to the water, finding themselves in 
such an in-between stage that they could no longer live in the water nor 
breathe the air? 

So in those terms, how many water dwellers died before the first 
mammal stood securely with fully completed lungs, breathing earth's 
early air? 

Scientists say now that energy and matter are one. They must take 
the next full step to realize that consciousness and energy and matter 
are one. 

(Pause at 9:22.) Give us a moment. ... In this book, then, we will 
look at the origin of the universe, the origin of the species, the origin of 
life from another viewpoint. This viewpoint will, I hope, provide 
another framework through which you can understand and study 
physical reality, your part in it, and sense the immense creative 
complexity that unites each individual with the source of consciousness 
itself. 

To do this, I hope to explore a more meaningful concept of evolution 1 
— and that concept must involve a discussion of subjective reality and 
its effect upon the "evolution" of man's consciousness. 

The universe did not originate from what you like to think of as an 
external, objectified source. Your own physical body provides you with 
sturdy corporal images, exterior presentations. Your dreams do not 
suddenly appear exteriorized upon your images in place of your 
features , for example. They remain hidden. Your dreams appear on the 
interior screen of your mind. 

I never want any of my remarks to be construed in such a 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


115 


fashion that it seems I am in any way negating the fullness, validity, 
and magnificence of physical existence. I do want to point out, 
however, that a state you usually call dreaming is but a dim indication 
of an inner reality of events (intently), an inner order of events from 
which the physical world emerges. I hope to show how the nature of 
dreams has helped shape man's consciousness. I hope to show that 
con sciousness forms the environ- ment. and not the other way around 
(with many gestures). 

I hope to show that all species are motivated by what I call value 
fulfillment, in which each seeks to enhance the quality of life for itself 
and for all other species at the same time. 

This further unites all species in a cooperative venture that has 
remained largely invisible because of beliefs projected outward upon 
the world by both your sciences and religions, generally speaking. All 
of your grandest civilizations have existed first in the world of dreams. 
You might say that the universe dreamed itself into being. 

(A one-minute pause at 9:40.) Give us a moment. . . . Generally 
speaking, the states of waking and sleeping are the only levels of 
consciousness with which you have been primarily concerned. It seems 
to you that this is the result of your evolutionary progress — but there 
have been civilizations upon the earth that specialized in the use of 
many focuses of consciousness, as for example you are focused upon 
the use of tools. 

Dreams can be highly specific. They can be used to provide sources 
of information. I hope to show their practical importance, both as a part 
of man's "evolutionary development" and their possibilities in what you 
think of as modem life. The answers are where you have least looked 
for them. The universe is still being created, even as each person is in 
each moment. 

(9:47.) End of Preface. That should make Ruburt feel better (with 
amusement), and give us a moment. Rest your fingers. . . . Will you 
open that (wine)? 

(After giving a little information for Jane, ' 2 Seth wound up the ses- 
sion:) 

We begin again with a new book, and I am sure your own lively mind 
will bring questions to the forefront that will be of interest. 

A fond good evening. 

("Thank you, Seth. Good night. ") 



116 


Jane Roberts 


(9:56 p.m. "/ could feel him around when I was doing the supper 
dishes" Jane said as soon as she was out of trance. "And I could feel 
him around more and more after that, but I still get cold feet when I 
know he's going to start a new hook. . . . Was it good?" 

I nodded a very pleased yes. "He said this one will be his most ambi- 
tious project to date. " 

"Well, I don't want to think about that. If I do, then I'll start worrying 
about my responsibility again and forget what Seth says about having the 
sessions because they're fun. Wow — I'm really out of it. I'll be curious as 
hell to read it, "Jane said as she headed for the couch. 

"So, " I joked, "the day wasn 't a total waste after all. We did get 
something done. " Even Jane laughed. 

It's impossible, of course, for us not to have a sense of responsibility 
about the sessions. I'm sure Seth knows this, but it's obvious that he wants 
us to maintain a light rather than a heavy psychological touch. Sometimes 
that's rather difficult to achieve, though. Recently we received an excel- 
lent, rather lengthy paper about our work in which the writer, a psychol- 
ogist, discussed among other things the import of Seth's material, as well 
as various explanations of his origin. We think about those subjects too, 
but in order to have the sessions on a week-to-week basis we concentrate 
upon the simple creative achievement embodied in each session itself and 
let go of the larger implications. Those implications are usually in the 
background of our joint awareness, however. ) 


NOTES. Session 881 

1. Recently, I bought two books written by "scientific creationists." The 
authors strongly disagree with ideas of evolution. I've read halfway 
through one of the books, and have discussed it with Jane to some 
extent. After the session I suggested that she start reading it also, in 
order to acquaint herself with theories radically different from the 
"ordinary" scientific ones espoused by evolutionists. Very briefly: The 
creationists believe that God created the universe (including the earth, 
obviously) around 10,000 years ago. They maintain that all of the 
earth's living forms have remained essentially unchanged since that 
prime creative event; they can account for the disappearance of the 
dinosaurs, for example, and the vast number of other life forms we no 
longer see around us. On the other hand, evolutionary 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


117 


science believes that the universe came into being between 10 billion 
and 20 billion years ago; that the earth itself is about 4.6 billion years 
old, and that according to the fossil record and other evidence, its living 
organisms first arose and began evolving at least 3.5 billion years ago. 
Science also believes, however, that the study of a "first cause" 
involves not scientific but philosophical and theological questions. For 
instance, why did the universe we think we know so well come into 
existence at all, and what was the cause of that beginning? 

I know that Jane is interested in the book in question, but also a bit 
afraid of it: "I don't want to be so influenced by it — or by any other 
book — that it starts coming out in the material," she's said more than 
once recently. I agree, since I think that in their own ways the views 
expressed by the scientific creationists are just as limited as those held 
by the conventional scientific establishment. But Jane has an excellent 
critical mind. I'm not concerned that anything she reads will unduly 
influence her — or Seth. 

2. I'm presenting the private portion of tonight's session for two reasons: 
Seth comments a bit upon the creative production of the sessions, and 
he shows how we can habitually impose upon our physical selves our 
conscious ideas of what we "should be doing" — not paying enough 
attention to our impulsive, natural, bodily messages. 

"Today, Ruburt's body wanted to relax. He has been doing very 
well, and he tried to approve, but since he lost work time yesterday, his 
approval barely went skin deep (louder). 

"When you mentioned his ink sketches he instantly wanted to play 
at painting again, but felt, guiltily, that he should not. He forgot, once 
again, that the creative self is aware of his entire life, and that his 
impulses have a creative purpose. 

"These sessions themselves involve the highest levels of creative 
productivity, at many levels, so he should refresh himself painting or 
doing whatever he likes, for that refreshment adds to his creativity, of 
course. He will finish his book (God of Jane), and do beautifully with 
it. He should follow the rhythms of his own creativity without being 
overly concerned with the time. For a while, again, have him write 
three hours of free writing, and paint or whatever. His book will be 
provided for. You can see 



118 


Jane Roberts 


how your own creativity is emerging in the notes for Mass Events. 
Granted, you need time to write physically, but the basic creativity has 
its own 'time.' 

"End of session, and a fond good evening." 

("Can I ask a question? ") 

"You may." 

("What was that feeling he had today in his chest, back, and body, 
like an electric pulsation?") 

"Because he did not approve of his own relaxation. He put brakes 
upon it." 

("Okay. ") 



CHAPTER 


Before the Beginning 


1 


SESSION 882— September 26, 1979 

9:14 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(Jane was rather relaxed tonight — again — but decided to try for the 
session. She's been reading the book on scientific creationism I suggested 
to her. Her feelings about it are both ambiguous and funny: "You've got 
to watch those guys, " she said more than once, meaning the creationists, 
"or they'll lead you right where they want you to go. You've got to keep 
thinking. I can only read so many pages at a time. ..." Adding to the 
humor of the situation is the fact that we've had people write or say the 
same thing about the Seth material. But Jane didn't mention any of those 
events. 

However, aside from being in outright conflict with the theory of 
evolution [and the idea of an ancient universe], the beliefs of the crea- 
tionists do pose a number of questions that are quite intriguing from our 
joint viewpoint. My statement doesn't mean that Jane and I endorse 
creationism just because we question the doctrines of evolution. We think 
that either one of those belief systems is much too inadequate to explain 
reality in any sort of comprehensive way. 

Jane expected Seth to work on his new book this evening. "Yeah, I've 
got sentences about it in my head. I'm just waiting for him to put them 
in order, " she said as we sat for the session. Then, without calling his 
material Chapter 1, dictation, or whatever:) 


119 



120 


Jane Roberts 


(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Now. (Long pause, one of many.) The universe will begin yesterday. 
The universe began tomorrow. Both of these statements are quite 
meaningless. The tenses are wrong, and perhaps your time sense is 
completely outraged. Yet the statement: "The universe began in some 
distant past," is, in basic terms, just as meaningless. 

In fact, the first two statements, while making no logical sense, do 
indeed hint of (pause) phenomena that show time itself to be no more 
than a creative construct. Time and space are in a fashion part of the 
furniture of your universe. 

The very experience of passing moments belongs to your psy- 
chological rooms in the same way that clocks are attached to your 
walls. Whenever science or religion seeks the origin of the universe, 
they search for it in the past. The universe is being created now 
(underlined). Creation occurs in each moment, in your terms. The 
illusion of time itself is being created now. It is therefore somewhat 
futile to look for the origins of the universe by using a time scheme that 
is in itself, at the very least, highly relative. 

Your now (underlined), or present moment, is a psychological 
platform. It seems that the universe began with an initial burst of 
energy of some kind (the "big bang"). Evolutionists cannot account for 
its cause. Many religious people believe that a god exists in a larger 
dimension of reality, and that he created the universe while being 
himself outside of it. He set it into motion. Many individuals, following 
either persuasion, believe that regardless of its source, the [universe] 1 
must run out of energy. Established science is quite certain that no 
energy can now be created or destroyed, but only transformed (as 
stated in the first law of thermodynamics). Science sees energy and 
matter as being basically the same thing, appearing differently under 
varying circumstances. 

(9:31.) In certain terms, science and religion are both dealing with 
the idea of an objectively created universe. Either God "made it," or 
physical matter, in some unexplained manner, was formed after an 
initial explosion of energy, and consciousness emerged from that 
initially dead matter in a way yet to be explained. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


121 


Instead, consciousness formed matter. As I have said before, each 
atom and molecule has its own consciousness. Consciousness and 
matter and energy are one, but consciousness initiates the 
transformation of energy into matter. In those terms, the "beginning" of 
your universe was a triumph in the expansion of consciousness, as it 
learned to translate itself into physical form. The universe emerged into 
actuality in the same way (underlined), but to a different degree, that 
any idea emerges from what you think of as subjectivity into physical 
expression. 

The consciousness of each reader of this book existed before the 
universe was formed — in parentheses: (in your terms) — but that 
consciousness was unmanifest. Your closest approximation — and it is 
an approximation only — of the state of being that existed before the 
universe was formed is the dream state. (Long pause.) In that state 
before the beginning, your consciousness existed free of space and 
time, aware of immense probabilities. This is extremely difficult to 
verbalize, yet it is very important that such an attempt be made. (Long 
pause.) Your consciousness is a part of an infinitely original creative 
process. 

I will purposely avoid using the word "God" because of the 
connotations placed upon it by conventional religion. I will make an 
attempt to explain the characteristics of this divine process throughout 
this book. I call the process "All That Is." All That Is is so much a part 
of its creations that it is almost impossible to separate the "creator from 
the creations," for each creation also carries indelibly within it the 
characteristics of its source. 

If you have thought that the universe followed a mechanistic model, 
then you would have to say that each portion of this "cosmic machine" 
created itself, knowing its position in the entire "future construction." 
You would have to say further that each portion came gladly out of its 
own source individually, neatly tailored to its position, while at the 
same time that individual source was also as intimately the source of 
each other individual portion. 

I am not saying that the universe is the result of some "psychological 
machine," either, but that each portion of consciousness is a part of All 
That Is, and that the universe falls together in a spontaneous, divine 
order (intently ) — and that each portion of consciousness carries within 
it indelibly the knowledge of the whole. 



122 


Jane Roberts 


The birth of the world represented a divine psychological awakening. 
Each consciousness that takes a part in the physical universe dreamed 
of such a physical existence, in your terms, before the earth was 
formed. In greater terms than yours, it is quite true to say that the 
universe is not formed yet, or that the universe has vanished. In still 
vaster terms, however, the fact is that in one state or another the 
universe has always existed. 

Your closest approximation of the purpose of the universe can be 
found in those loving emotions that you have toward the development 
of your children, in your intent to have them develop their fullest 
capacities. 

(9:58.) Your finest aspirations can give you some dim clue as to the 
great creative thrust that is behind your own smallest act, for your own 
smallest act is possible only because your body has already been 
provided for in the physical world. Your life is given. In each moment it 
is renewed. So smoothly and effortlessly do you ride that thrust of life's 
energy that you are sometimes scarcely aware of it. (Pause.) You are 
not equipped with a certain amount of energy that then wears out and 
dies. Instead you are, again, newly created in each moment. 

That is enough for now. End of session, and a fond good evening. 

("Thank you, Seth. Good night. ") 

(10:02 p.m. "That was short, but I don't care, " Jane said right after 
coming out of her trance state. "I thought that was what there was 
tonight. I never stop when there's more, like you'd turn off a faucet. " 

"I assume that's Chapter 1?" 

"Oh yeah, he never said. Well, tomorrow I'll paint and forget the 
whole business about evolution. ..." 

But as I type this material two evenings later [on Friday], I can note 
that Jane didn't paint at all. Instead she continued to work on her own 
God of Jane. She also finished reading the book on creationism, and at 
my request today wrote a page or so about her reactions to it. Her little 
essay is given as Note 2. Then see Note 3 for my own comments about 
evolution as I discussed that subject in Volume 2 of "Unknown" Reality.) 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


123 


NOTES. Session 882 

1. Originally Jane said "world" here, where I'm sure Seth 
wanted her to say "universe." Anytime I make such a change in 
Seth's copy, or insert a clarifying word or phrase as though it 
came from him, or might have, the alteration is in brackets [like 
this]. Occasionally Jane or I may recast a sentence of Seth's, but 
this isn't necessary even once per session. Our rule is that other 
wise we do not change or delete any of his material without 
noting it. 

Insertions I make in parentheses and italics, like "(as stated in the 
first law of thermodynamics)," are meant to be informative and 
obviously aren't from Seth. 

2. "Rob wanted me to do a paragraph or so about my reactions 

to the book on scientific creationism that I've just finished read 
ing," Jane wrote, "so here goes. The book follows the idea that 
an objectified God made the universe (and the earth) in a perfect 
condition, and that instead of evolving toward more complicated 

forms, it's running down; that decay and catastrophe are break 

downs of previous better conditions, but that even these will 

finally be removed by the Creator after they have served their 
own special purposes. The book states that the universe is 
around 10,000 years old. (Seth has said more than once that in 
those term s it's even older than the evolutionists believe.) The 
reasons given for this young age seem reasonable enough, 
though I hardly have the background knowledge to know how 

good they'd sound to an evolutionary geologist, say. . . . 

"Maybe between one and two thousand years after the Creation a 
worldwide flood destroyed practically everything, though some 
species, including man, survived. (No even approximate date for the 
flood is given in the book. Noah, the 10th male in descent from Adam 
— Noah and his family, and the divine command he received to build 
the Ark — aren't even mentioned. But how could they be, in a book on 
scientific creationism?) There was no evolution. All species were 
created as they now appear. Oddly, if you postulate a god in that 
fashion, a personified one, then you wonder why he couldn't — or didn't 
choose to — maintain the perfection of his original creation. Why man's 
sin, re- 



124 


Jane Roberts 


suiting in the catastrophic flood, to which all species fell victim ? The 
regular theory of evolution doesn't have to contend with such questions, 
of course, but in the book 1 just read no explanations for questions like 
that are given — I don't even remember that they were raised. 

"The creationists put down other species, as do the evolutionists, 
taking it as fact that no other species is capable of conceptual thought, 
where 1 think that statement is extremely dubious generally, and even 
specifically in light of the work being done with dolphins, for example. 
The explanation for man's use of language sounded a bit pat, too: God 
just made him that way. 

"I'd say that both the creation and evolution models suffer from 
logical and emotional sloppiness, and that neither one presents a 
reasonable view of man's origins. Both concepts seem equally 
implausible when you think of them with any objectivity, and neither 
can be proven, of course. They ultimately rest upon the faith of the 
believer! I get a spooky feeling that I've had before, thinking that here 
we are, alive and conscious, technologically accomplished, and we 
really haven't the slightest idea of where the universe came from or 
why we're alive, though as a species we're gifted with both intellect and 
intuition. At best our established concepts seem grossly insufficient. So 
Seth's version of All That Is being both within and without the universe 
makes more sense to me, and I'm very curious about where he'll go 
with this in his book. This morning, looking over the few-pages we 
have so far, I got the idea that the title for the first chapter is going to 
be: 'Before the Beginning' — so we'll see. . . . 

"In a magazine on parapsychology I recently read an article 
containing ideas that I think are at least a little more reasonable than 
those of creationism or evolutionism: Though the writer did take 
evolution for granted, he also put consciousness within matter." 

I was surprised after the session tonight when Jane said that she still 
wants to read the second of the two books on creationism I'd bought, 
not long before she began delivering Dreams for Seth. 

3. I've known Seth planned to discuss evolution — that sensitized 
subject — ever since Jane tuned into the title of his new book a couple 
of months ago. However, my interest in one of my favor- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


125 


ite fields of inquiry lay relatively dormant until Seth confirmed the title 
earlier this month (September); then I felt the impulse to jump right into 
producing notes on the subject. Better wait, I told myself and Jane, until 
we had an idea of how Seth is going to handle his own material on 
evolution. 

I had finished Appendix 12 for Volume 2 of "Unknown" Reality by 
August 1977. I'd devoted the piece to a study of the establishment 
theory of evolution versus ideas Seth, Jane, and I have on that theme, 
and noted that I'd accumulated much information from a number of 
sources. I've amassed much more data by now, of course. Perhaps, I 
thought when putting together the Preface for Dreams, I just wanted to 
use some of our later material in the new book. 

Yet most of what I wrote in Appendix 12 is still valid, to my mind, 
even though I've always wanted to expand (and expound?) upon all of 
it. There are a few things I'd put somewhat differently now, given the 
advantage of a couple of years' hindsight, but Jane and I don’t really 
want to revise the material. We'd rather let it stand as is, representing 
our best knowledge and feeling of that time, including the way we put 
to use Seth's own information on the subject. If that "best knowledge" 
was groping and imperfect, then so be it. I think it most interesting that 
the theory of evolution is now challenged by those who, like Jane and I, 
simply want to know whether it has a basis in scientific fact; and that 
it's also come under virulent attack by those who generally believe in 
fundamentalist religions. The controversy over whether evolution ever 
really happened — and/or is happening — is far from resolved, whether in 
scientific, religious, or lay terms. 

But why, I asked Jane, haven't our best minds — at least those who 
have operated throughout the centuries of our recorded history — been 
able to arrive at some sort of reasonable consensus about the "origin" of 
our universe (if it had one), its processes, and our human place in it? In 
their many forms religion and science haven't provided satisfactory 
answers, nor have agnosticism or atheism. Why have so many human 
beings (an estimated 50 billion of them) had to exist along the way 
before we arrived at our present point — from which point we in our 
collective wisdom think we might begin to provide meaningful answers 
to such questions? If true, this proposition means that for 



126 


Jane Roberts 


all of that time, all of those people lived pretty useless lives as far as 
having any real understanding of their universe goes — hardly a natural 
situation, I told Jane. Life can't really be that way. The whole set of 
questions must be meaningless in deeper terms. 

So why do Jane and I think we're on to something with the Seth 
material — that it can help if given the chance? Why haven't others — our 
scientific, religious, and political leaders, or those in the fine arts, say — 
come up with ideas similar to those espoused by a Seth, and why aren't 
those ideas common today? Seth's kind of information must have 
surfaced innumerable times, I think, and for many reasons fallen short 
as broad coherent systems of thought. How would theology, or the 
sociology of science, answer any or all of these questions? 


SESSION 883— October 1, 1979 

9:06 p.m. MONDAY 

(Last Saturday night, Jane and I presided over a "class " reminiscent of 
the weekly ESP classes we used to hold in our downtown apartments 
before we moved to the hill home, just outside Elmira, in 1975. A large 
group of former students attended from New York City, as well as some 
from the local area. The evening was a great success. Since each person 
knew everyone else so well, the verbal exchanges were many and often 
blindingly rapid. They were also hilarious: I laughed so often and so 
hard that my stomach ended up hurting. My voice was gone by the end 
of the meeting [and the next day it was still very hoarse]. Seth came 
through again and again, as he'd often done in class, and Jane thor- 
oughly enjoyed herself. We're to get transcripts of the several tapes made. 

Through it all each one of us felt a penetrating nostalgia for those 
vanished classes, for they'd been truly unique; I don't think it would be 
possible to recapture their particular, innocent, lasting sense of excite- 
ment and exploration. As might be expected, I appreciate Jane's accom- 
plishments in them much more now than I did during the nearly seven 
years they were underway. 

Almost three weeks ago I wrote in the Preface for Dreams that we 
were waiting to receive the first published copies of Jane's Emir's Edu- 
cation in the Proper Use of Magical Powers. Today the books arrived. 
Eleanor Friede, Jane's editor at Delacorte Press, has done a fine 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


127 


job of supervising the illustration and production of a handsome little 
volume. All of us hope Emir does well in the marketplace. 

This evening it was obvious that Jane really wanted to have the ses- 
sion, because she told me she was ready for it early. For a change we 
decided to do our thing in her writing room, or den, at the back of the 
house. She started out speaking for Seth very quietly, but her delivery 
soon became much more intent — then often louder and impassioned: 
Jane used many more gestures than usual, staring wide-eyed at me, 
leaning forward again and again in her rocker, crossing and uncrossing 
her legs. She was turned on in trance, wound up, her pace considerably 
faster than it's been lately.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Dictation. The heading of the chapter — I forgot to give it to you — is: 
"Before the Beginning." 

Now: You cannot prove scientifically that [your] world was created 
(pause) by a god who set it into motion, but remained outside of its 
dominion. Nor can you prove scientifically that the creation of the 
world was the result of a chance occurrence — so you will not be able to 
prove what I am going to tell you either. Not in usual terms. 

I hope however to present, along with my explanations, certain hints 
and clues that will show you where to look for subjec-tive evidence. 
Period. 

You live your lives through your own subjective knowing, to begin 
with, and I will try to arouse within your own consciousnesses 
memories of events with which your own inner psyches were 
intimately involved as the world was formed — and though these may 
appear to be past events, they are even now occurring. 

Before the beginning of the universe, we will postulate the existence 
of an omnipotent, creative source. (Pause.) We will hope to show that 
this divine subjectivity is as present in the world of your experience as 
it was before the beginning of the universe. Again, I refer to this 
original subjectivity as All That Is. I am making an attempt to verbalize 
concepts that almost defy the edges of the intellect, unless that intellect 
is thoroughly reinforced by the intuition's strength. So you will need to 
use your mind and your own intuitions as you read this book. 

All That Is, before the beginning contained within itself the infinite 
thrust of all possible creations. All That Is possessed 



128 


Jane Roberts 


(pause) a creativity of such magnificence that its slightest imaginings, 
dreams, thoughts, feelings or moods attained a kind of reality, a 
vividness, an intensity, that almost demanded freedom. Freedom from 
what? Freedom to do what? Freedom to be what? 

The experience, the subjective universe, the "mind" of All That Is, 
was so brilliant, so distinct, that All That Is almost became lost, 
mentally wandering within this ever-flourishing, evergrowing interior 
landscape. Each thought, feeling, dream, or mood was itself indelibly 
marked with all of the attributes of this infinite subjectivity. Each 
glowed and quivered with its own creativity, its own desire to create as 
it had been created. 

Before the beginning there existed an interior universe that had no 
beginning or ending, for I am using the term "before the beginning" to 
make matters easier for you to assimilate. In parentheses: (That same 
infinite interior universe exists now, for example.) 

(Pause at 9:31.) All That Is contained within itself the knowledge of 
all existences, with their infinite probabilities, and "as soon as" All That 
Is imagined those numberless circumstances, they existed in what I will 
call divine fact. 

All That Is knew of itself only. It was engrossed with its own 
subjective experiences, even divinely astonished as its own thoughts 
and imaginings attained their own vitality, and inherited the creativity 
of their subjective creator. [Those thoughts and imaginings] began to 
have a dialogue with their "Maker" (all very emphatically). 

Thoughts of such magnificent vigor began to think their own 
thoughts — and their thoughts thought thoughts. As if in divine 
astonishment and surprise, All That Is began to listen, and began to 
respond to these "generations" of thoughts and dreams, for the thoughts 
and dreams related to each other also. There was no time, so all of this 
"was happening" simultaneously. The order of events is being 
simplified. In the meantime, then, in your terms, All That Is 
spontaneously thought new thoughts and dreamed new dreams, and 
became involved in new imaginings — and all of these also related to 
those now-infinite generations of interweaving and interrelating 
thoughts and dreams that "already" existed (with many gestures and 
much emphasis). 

So beside this spontaneous creation, this simultaneous 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


129 


"stream" of divine rousing, All That Is began to watch the interactions 
that occurred among his own subjective progeny. (Pause.) He listened, 
began to respond and to answer a thought or a dream. He began to 
purposefully bring about those mental conditions that were requested 
by these generations of mental progeny. If he had been lonely before, 
he was no longer. 

Your language causes some difficulty here, so please accept the 
pronoun "he" as innocuously as possible. "It" sounds too neutral for my 
purpose, and I want to reserve the pronoun "she" for some later 
differentiations. In basic terms, of course, All That Is is quite beyond 
any designations having to do with any one species or sex. All That Is, 
then, began to feel a growing sense of pressure as it 1 realized that its 
own ever-multiplying thoughts and dreams themselves yearned to enjoy 
those greater gifts of creativity with which they were innately endowed. 

It is very difficult to try to assign anything like human motivation to 
All That Is. I can only say that it is possessed by "the need" to lovingly 
create from its own being; to lovingly transform its own reality in such 
a way that each most slight probable consciousness can come to be 
(long pause); and with the need to see that any and all possible 
orchestrations of consciousness have the chance to emerge, to perceive 
and to love. 

We will later discuss the fuller connotations of the word "love" as it 
is meant here, but this chapter is a kind of outline of other material to 
come. 

All That Is, then, became aware of a kind of creative tumult as each 
of its superlative thoughts and dreams, moods and feelings, strained at 
the very edges of their beings, looking for some then-unknown, 
undiscovered, as of then unthought-of release. I am saying that this 
mental progeny included all of the consciousnesses that [have] ever 
appeared or will appear upon your earth — all tenderly couched: the first 
human being, the first insect — each with an inner knowledge of the 
possibilities of its development. All That Is, loving its own progeny, 
sought within itself the answer to this divine dilemma (all very intently, 
with eyes wide and dark, and with numerous gestures). 

(Pause at 9:57.) When that answer came, it involved previously 
unimaginable leaps of divine inspiration, and it occurred thusly: All 
That Is searched through the truly infinite assortment of its incredible 
progeny to see what conditions were needed for this 



130 


Jane Roberts 


even more magnificent dream, this dream of a freedom of objectivity. 
What door could open to let physical reality emerge from such an inner 
realm? When All That Is, in your terms, put all of those conditions 
together it saw, of course, in a flash, the mental creation of those 
objective worlds that would be needed — and as it imagined those 
worlds, in your terms, they were physically created. 

[All That Is] did not separate itself from those worlds, however, for 
they were created from its thoughts, and each one has divine content. 
The worlds are all created by that divine content, so that while they are 
on the one hand exterior, they are on the other also made of divine stuff, 
and each hypothetical point in your universe (pause) is in direct contact 
with All That Is in the most basic terms. The knowledge of the whole is 
within all of its parts — and yet All That Is is more than its parts. 

Divine subjectivity is indeed infinite. It can never be entirely 
objectified. When the worlds, yours and others, were thus created, there 
was indeed an explosion of unimaginable proportions, as the divine 
spark of inspiration exploded into objectivity. 

The first "object" was an almost unendurable mass, though it had no 
weight, and it exploded, instantaneously beginning processes that 
formed the universe — but no time was involved. The process that you 
might imagine took up eons occurred in the twinkling of an eye, and the 
initial objective materialization of the massive thought of All That Is 
burst into reality. In your term s this was a physical explosion — but in 
the terms of the consciousnesses involved in that breakthrough, this was 
experienced as a triumphant "first" inspirational frenzy, a breakthrough 
into another kind of being (most intently). 

The earth then appeared as consciousness transformed itself into the 
many facets of nature. The atoms and molecules were alive, aware — 
they were no longer simply a part of a divine syntax, but they spoke 
themselves through the very nature of their being (gesturing). They 
became the living, aware vowels and syllables through which 
consciousness could form matter. 

But in your terms this was still largely a dream world, though it was 
fully fashioned. It had, generally speaking, all of the species that you 
now know. These all correlated with the multitudinous kinds of 
consciousnesses that had clamored for release, and those 
consciousnesses were spontaneously endowed by All That Is with those 
forms that fit their requirements. You had the birth 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


131 


of individualized consciousness as you think of it into physical context. 
Those consciousnesses were individualized before the beginning, but 
not manifest. But individualized consciousness was not quite all that 
bold. It did not attach itself completely to its earthly forms at the start, 
but rested often within its "ancient" divine heritage. In your terms, it is 
as if the earth and all of its creatures were partially dreaming, and not 
as focused within physical reality as they are now. 

(10:08.) For one thing, while individualized consciousness was 
within the massive subjectivity of All That Is, it enjoyed, beside its own 
uniqueness, a feeling of supporting unity, a comforting knowledge that 
it was one with its source. So in the beginning of [your] world, 
consciousness fluctuated greatly, focusing gently at the start, but not 
quite as willing to be as fully independent as its first intent might seem. 

You had the sleepwalkers,-' early members of your species, whose 
main concentration was still veiled in that earlier subjectivity, and they 
were your true ancestors, in those terms. 

Are you tired? 

("I'm okay. ") 

For one thing, early man needed to rely upon his great inner 
knowledge. Take your break. 

(10:23. Seth's call for a break was abrupt. "Is one of the cats out?" 
Jane asked right away, looking around. Billy, our eight-month-old tiger 
cat, was sleeping on a chair near us. A couple of minutes ago he'd started 
making some odd high-pitched sounds I hadn't heard him produce before. 
I'd wondered if those noises might bother Jane in trance — and they had. 
I didn't know where Billy's littermate Mitzi was, though. I found her 
locked out on the screened-in front porch. 

("I don't want to lose it, "Jane said. She went quickly back into trance. 
Purring and rubbing, Mitzi began to climb all over me as I tried to take 
notes. Resume at 10:30.) 

All of the species began by emphasizing a great subjective 
orientation that was most necessary as they learned to manipulate 
within the new physical environment. 

(Jane paused, eyes closed. Mitzi was still loving me up. Then:) 

End of session. 

(10:31 p.m. "Oh, " I said in some surprise. 

"I'll tell you, " Jane said, "I was getting more. It was fun to do, and I 
knew what was coming, but going back like that I couldn 't get it. " 

I told Jane the session is brilliant, the best she's ever given. I told her 



132 


Jane Roberts 


it raised many questions, but that I didn't think anyone, at any time, had dealt 
better with the "origin " of our universe, our world, our history. 

"I got some of it before the session — about the initial ones before the earth 
was formed — you could call them nonphysical entities. But it sounds dumb 
when you say it now: Physical entities couldn't hold all that much 
consciousness. I didn 't know it was that definite until the end of the session, 
though. . . . Boy, that was a really good state, " she said with satisfaction. "I 
really enjoyed it. ..." 

But I had to admit that I was also surprised. Seth had come through so 
rapidly and emphatically that while taking notes I'd hardly had lime to think 
about questions. What's he trying to do, I asked Jane — combine something like 
science's theoretical "big-bang" origin of the universe, all of those billions of 
years ago, with creationism's theory of a recent spontaneous, divine creation of 
that same universe"? Has our earth and all of its creatures "evolved, " or not? 
Could you have simultaneous evolution? [Here we go again, I speculated, back 
to struggling with that contradictory notion of "simultaneous time. "] How does 
Seth's instantaneous "beginning processes that formed the universe" — with no 
time involved — square with fossils in the earth? Isn't he saying that the 
universe grew/ evolved through a series of dream states? 

I told Jane that as far as I know the unimaginable explosion of the 
primordial superdense state, or entity, that resulted in the formation of our 
universe had been a straightforward event: Once begun, it kept going. There 
hadn't been any fluctuations or on-off states balancing between the physical 
and nonphysical, for example. Science currently postulates this theory as its 
"standard model" for the creation of the universe} 

So how do Seth 's own ideas of probable universes and probable earths fit in 
with his material tonight — as I'm sure they do? I quickly saw that my questions 
could go on and on. Seth's book is young, I told myself. Wait. Wait. . . . 

And Mitzi, her affectionate display long finished, had jumped down from my 
lap and disappeared as Jane and I talked.) 


NOTES. Session 883 

1. Seth was/evidently experimenting here, for right away he went back 
to using "it," instead of "he," when referring to All That Is. "It" may not 
be entirely satisfactory either, but Jane and 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


133 


I didn't question Seth about it: We prefer that designation because it 
encompasses any kind of sexual orientation and/or function within All 
That Is. (When Seth used "he" while talking about All That Is a couple 
of times later in the session, I substituted "it" in my notes and let it go 
at that.) 

2. Seth first discussed the "sleepwalkers" in Volume 2 of "Un 
known" Reality — see Session 708 for September 30, 1974. Here's 
a much-condensed version of that he told us that night after 
break ended at 9:56: 

"Imagine a body with a fully operating body consciousness, not 
diseased or defective, but without the overriding ego-directed 
consciousness that you have. The sleepwalkers' physical abilities 
surpassed yours. They were as agile as animals, their purpose simply to 
be. Their main points of consciousness were elsewhere, their primary 
focuses scarcely aware of the bodies they had created. Yet they learned 
'through experience,' and began to 'awaken,' to become aware of 
themselves, to discover time, or to create it. 

"They were not asleep to themselves, only from your viewpoint. 
There were several such races of human beings. To them the real was 
the dream life, which contained the highest stimuli. This is the other 
side of your own experience. Such races left the physical earth much as 
they found it. In what you would call the physical waking state, these 
individuals slept, yet they behaved with great natural physical grace. 
They did not saddle the body with negative beliefs of disease or 
limitation. They did not age to the extent that you do." 

In "Unknown" Reality, then, Seth's material on the sleepwalkers 
heralded one of the main themes of Dreams, which he began five years 
later. Dreams was unsuspected by us then, of course; so what books to 
come will have their genesis in this one? 

(I'll add that Jane and I have received several thousand letters since 
the publication of Volume 2 of "Unknown" Reality. As best I can 
remember, however, not a single writer has mentioned the sleepwalkers 
— one of Seth's most intriguing concepts.) 

3. Theoretical physicists have charted (assuming that the big- 
bang origin of the universe w r as a hot event) how the first explo 
sion may have "evolved" from one with a temperature well in 
excess of 100,000 million degrees Kelvin into a cooler one of 



134 


Jane Roberts 


"only" a few thousand degrees Kelvin around 500,000 years later, so 
that atoms could begin to form. Jane has heard of this standard model, 
of course, but knows little about its supposed details. 

In ordinary terms, she knows practically nothing concerning several 
other less prominent theories regarding the beginning of the universe. I 
haven't discussed these with her. One of them is the "inflationary 
model," which may become much better known. It incorporates many 
of the features of the big-bang theory, and actually may answer certain 
questions in a better scientific fashion. One of the big differences 
between the two is that in the big-bang theory all of the matter in the 
universe was already present, though existing in an extremely dense 
state which then began to expand; the inflationary model suggests that 
the universe was created out of nothing, or out of just about nothing — 
meaning that through unforeseeable rhythms subatomic particles 
spontaneously came into being, with sufficient energy behind them to 
enable them to persist as matter. A fantastic, inflationary expansion then 
began. Yet this creation of matter out of nothing, so to speak, violates at 
least some of the laws of conservation — laws that are indeed among the 
most basic and cherished tenets of physics. 

From my reading of Seth's ideas of "in the beginning," however, I'm 
sure he couldn't agree with either the big-bang or inflationary models of 
the creation of the universe, even though his material may be evocative 
of portions of both theories. In physics, we're asked to believe that this 
"extremely dense state" which began to expand was in actuality many 
billions of times smaller than a proton. (Protons are subatomic 
components of the nuclei of atoms.) Matter is a form of energy. Even 
so, I have trouble conceptualizing the idea that all matter in our 
universe, out to the farthest-away galaxy of billions of stars, grew from 
this unimaginably small and dense, unimaginably hot "original" state or 
area of being. I can see how such a concept can be postulated 
mathematically — but could it ever have really happened in ordinary 
terms? 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


135 


SESSION 884— October 3, 1979 

9:13 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(The weather has been exceptionally warm this fall — warm and often 
rainy or misty, but most welcome for this time of year. The trees seem way 
behind schedule; we've seen the first signs of their leaves turning color 
just recently. The grass has even started growing again, after lying dry 
and dormant for a long period this summer. 

Yesterday morning I heard geese flying south for the first time this 
season, but they were invisible above a heavy overcast. This afternoon I 
both heard and saw them, and called them to Jane's attention — a wide, 
straggling, shifting, V-shaped flight vanishing over the valley holding 
the city just below us. The geese looked very vulnerable against the 
massive roll of the earth beneath them, but this was an illusion: Like 
every other entity on earth, each one of those birds knew very well what 
it was doing. Each was well equipped to seek out its individual value 
fulfillment. 

I finished typing last Monday night's session a few minutes before we 
sat for this one, and Jane just had time to read it before she felt Seth 
around: "Okay, I'm ready. . . .") 

Now. (Smile. Then elaborately:) Let us return to our tale or origins. 

We are sitting here on a specific autumn evening. I am obviously 
dictating this book, speaking through Ruburt, while Joseph sits on the 
couch across from a very specific coffee table, taking down my words. 

This is the year 1979, and the idea of time and of dates seems to be 
indelibly mixed into [everyone's] psychology. You can remember last 
year, and to some extent recall the past years of your lives. It appears to 
you that your present consciousness wanders backward into the past, 
until finally you can remember no longer — and on a conscious level, at 
least, you must take the very event of your birth under secondhanded 
evidence. Few people have conscious memory of it. 

For the purposes of our discussion, I must necessarily couch this 
book to some degree in the framework of time. I must honor your 
specifics. Otherwise you would not understand what I am trying to say. 

(Pause, one of many.) Even though this book is being dictated 



136 


Jane Roberts 


within time's tradition, therefore, I must remind you that basically 
(underlined) that tradition is not mine — and more, basically 
(underlined), it is not yours either. 

I used the term "before the beginning," then, and I will speak of 
earth's events in certain sequences. In the deepest of terms, however, 
and in ways that quite scandalize the intellect when it tries to operate 
alone, the beginning is now. That critical explosion of divine 
subjectivity into objectivity is always happening, and you are being 
given life "in each moment" because of the simultaneous nature of that 
divine subjectivity. 

(Pause.) We will nevertheless call our next chapter "In the 
Beginning," laying certain events out for you in serial form. I hope that 
in other portions of this book certain mental exercises will allow you to 
leap over the tradition of time's framework and sense with the united 
intellect and intuitions your own individual part in a spacious present 
that is large enough to contain all of time's segments. 



CHAPTER 


2 


In the Beginning 


Chapter Two: "In the Beginning." 

Once again, in terms of your equations, energy and consciousness 
and matter are one. And in those terms — in parentheses: (the 
qualifications are necessary) — consciousness is the agent that directs 
the transformation of energy into form and of form into energy. All 
possible visible or invisible particles that you discover or imagine — 
meaning hypothesized particles — possess consciousness. They are 
energized consciousness. 

There are certain characteristics inherent in energy itself, quite aside 
from any that you ascribe to it, since of course to date you do not 
consider energy conscious. 

( 9 : 35 .) Energy is above all things infinitely creative, innovative, 
original. Energy is imaginative. In parentheses: (Any scientists who 
might be reading this book may as well stop here.) I am not assigning 
human traits to energy. Instead, your human traits are the result of 
energy's characteristics — a rather important difference. Space as you 
think of it is, in your terms, filled with invisible particles. They are the 
unstated portion of physical reality, the unmanifest medium in which 
your world exists. In that regard, however, atoms and molecules are 
stated, though you cannot see them with your [unaided] eye. The 
smaller particles that make them up become "smaller and smaller," 
finally disappearing from the examination of any kind of physical 
instrument, 



138 


Jane Roberts 


and these help bridge the gap between unmanifest and manifest reality. 1 

For the terms of this discussion of the beginning of [your] world, I 
will deal with known qualities for now — the atoms and molecules. In 
the beginning they imagined the myriad of forms that were physically 
possible. They imagined the numberless c-e-l-l-s (spelled out) that 
could arise from their own cooperative creation. Energy is boundless. It 
is exuberant. It knows no limits (all intently). In those terms, the atoms 
dreamed the cells into physical being — and from that new threshold of 
physical activity cellular consciousness dreamed of the myriad 
organizations that could emerge from this indescribable venture. 

Again, in actuality all of this took place at once, yet the depth of 
psychological experience contained therein can never be measured, for 
it involved a kind of value fulfillment with which each consciousness is 
involved. That characteristic of value fulfillment is perhaps the most 
important element in the being of All That Is, and it is a part of the 
heritage of all species. 

Value fulfillment itself is most difficult to describe, for it combines 
(pause) the nature of a loving presence — a presence with the innate 
knowledge of its own divine complexity — with a creative ability of 
infinite proportions that seeks to bring to fulfillment even the slightest, 
most distant portion of its own inverted complexity. Translated into 
simpler terms, each portion of energy is endowed with an inbuilt reach 
of creativity that seeks to fulfill its own potentials in all possible 
variations — and in such a way that such a development also furthers the 
creative potentials of each other portion of reality (all very 
emphatically). 

In those terms, then, there was in the beginning an almost 
unimaginable time in which energized consciousness, using its own 
creative abilities, its own imagination (underlined), experimented with 
triumphant rambunctiousness, trying out one form after another. In the 
terms you are used to thinking of, nothing was stable. Consciousness as 
you think of it turned into matter, and then into pure energy and back 
again. 

(Pause at 9:56.) Subjectivity still largely ruled. Like an adolescent 
leaving home for the first time, individualized consciousness was also 
somewhat homesick, and returned often to the family homestead — but 
gradually gained confidence and left finally to form a [universe]. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


139 


Now because All That Is contains within itself such omnipotent, 
fertile, divine creative characteristics, all portions of its subjective 
experience attained dimensions of actuality impossible to describe. The 
thoughts, for example, of All that Is were not simply thoughts as you 
might have, but multidimensional mental events of superlative nature. 
Those events soon found that a transformation must occur (pause), if 
they were to journey into objectivity — for no objectivity of itself could 
contain the entire reality of subjective events that existed within divine 
subjectivity. Only in that context could their relative (underlined) 
perfection be maintained. Yet they had yearned before the beginning for 
other experiences, and even for fulfillments of a different nature. They 
sensed a kind of value fulfillment that required of them the utilization of 
their own creative abilities. They yearned to create as they had been 
created, and All That Is, in a kind of divine perplexity, nevertheless 
realized that this had always been its own intent. 

(Pause.) All That Is realized that such a separation would also allow 
you (pause) to bring about a different kind of divine art, in which the 
creators themselves created, and their creations created, bringing into 
actuality existences that were possible precisely because there would 
seem (underlined) to be a difference between the creator and the 
creations. All That Is is, therefore, within each smallest portion of 
consciousness. 

Yet each smallest portion of consciousness can uniquely create, bring 
into being, eccentric 2 versions of All That Is, that in certain terms All 
That Is, without that separation, could not otherwise create. The loving 
support, the loving encouragement of the slightest probable 
consciousness and manifestation — that is the intent of All That Is. 

(Long pause.) All That Is knows that even this purpose is a portion of 
a larger purpose. In terms of time, the realization of that purpose will 
emerge with another momentous explosion of subjective inspiration 
into objectivity, or into another form. In deeper terms, however, that 
purpose is also known now, and to one extent or another the entire 
universe dreams of it, as once cellular consciousness dreamed of the 
organs that it might "form." 

(10:15.) I want to stress that I am speaking here not so much about a 
kind of spiritual evolution as I am about an expan- 



140 


Jane Roberts 


sion. 3 We will for now, however, confine ourselves to a discussion of 
consciousness in the beginning of the world, stressing that the first 
basis of physical life was largely subjective, and that the state of 
dreaming not only helped shape the consciousness of your species, but 
also in those terms served to provide a steady source of information to 
man about his physical environment, and served as an inner web of 
communication among all species. 

End of dictation. 

(10:19.) Give us a moment. . . . Remind me, for our next session, to 
wind in a discussion of those subjective entities as they learned how to 
translate themselves into physical individuals. 

(Heartily:) End of dictation, end of session, a fond good evening — 

("Thank you. ") 

— and I enjoy the cozy specific nature of your den (Jane's writing 
room) in its hillside house, nestled in its physical nest, the specific 
streets and small city. Particularly when we are discussing issues of 
such complexity — issues seemingly so vast, and yet issues that are 
themselves responsible for your perception of a specific evening. 

My fondest good wishes — a fond good evening. 

("Thank you, Seth. Goodnight.") 

(10:23 p.m. "I don't know whether it's going to last or not, "Jane said, 
"but I'm enjoying this hook more than any. I get into a certain state that's 
really nice. It's very rich and deep. Like I know the session wasn't too 
long, but I had that sense of completion when he went back incredibly far. 
It's satisfying as all shit. " 

I laughed. It was easy to tell that Jane was happy working on Seth 's 
latest. I gladly told her the session was just as good, just as inspiring, as 
her last one — the 883 rd: Once again her delivery had been intent, often 
impassioned, given with many gestures. She's been picking up from Seth 
on Dreams quite often. Sometimes she tells me as soon as she's done this. 
At other times she may forget to mention it for a while, or the session 
material itself may remind her that she already knew what Seth was going 
to talk about.) 


NOTES. Session 884 

1. In Volume 1 of "Unknown" Reality, I wrote in Note 7 for Session 681 
that atoms are "processes" rather than things. The clas- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


HI 


sical conception of the typical atom as being composed of a neat 
nucleus of indivisible protons and neutrons circled by electrons is 
largely passe, although for convenience's sake we may still describe the 
atom that way. (In those terms, the one exception is the hydrogen atom, 
which evidently consists of but one proton and one electron cloud, or 
"smear.") For the simple purposes of this note, then, I'm leaving out 
considerations involving quantum mechanics, which concept repudiates 
the idea of "particles" to begin with. (And surely that notion involves 
more than a little of the psychic, or "irrational." What a heretical 
thought from the scientific viewpoint!) But each atom of whatever 
element is an amazingly complicated, finely balanced assemblage of 
forces and particles woven together in exquisite detail — one of the 
more basic examples of the unending and stupendous creativity, order, 
and design of nature, or consciousness, or All That Is. 

Through their work with particle accelerators, or "atom smashers," 
physicists have discovered that protons and neutrons themselves are 
composed of forces and particles that in turn are almost certainly 
composed of forces and particles, and so on, in an ever-descending 
scale of smaller and smaller entities and concepts. Over 100 subatomic 
particles have been identified so far, and no one doubts now that many 
more will be found. The existence of a number of still-undiscovered 
specific particles has been predicted. All of which reminds me that 
almost 16 years ago, in only the 19th session he'd given us (on January 
27, 1964), Seth remarked: 

"Your scientists can count their elements. . . . That is, they will 
create more and discover more until they are ready to go out of their 
minds, because they will always create [physical] 'camouflages' of the 
real [nonphysical] thing. And while they create instruments to deal with 
smaller and smaller particles, they will actually see smaller and smaller 
particles, seemingly without end. 

"As their instruments reach farther into the universe they will 'see' — 
and I suggest that you put the word 'see' into quotes — they will 'see' 
farther and farther, but they will automatically transform what they 
apparently 'see' into the camouflage patterns with which they are 
familiar. They are and they will be the prisoners of their own tools. 

"Instruments calculated to measure the vibrations with which 
scientists are familiar will be designed and redesigned. All sorts 



142 


Jane Roberts 


finally of seemingly impossible phenomena will be discovered with 
these instruments, until the scientists realize that something is 
desperately wrong. The instruments will be planned to catch certain 
camouflages, and since they will be expertly thought out they will 
perform their function. I do not want to get too involved. However, by 
certain means the instruments themselves will transform data from 
terms that you cannot understand into terms that you can understand. 
Scientists do this all the time." 

Some of the "particles" the theoretical physicists have discovered — 
and/or created — in their gigantic particle accelerators have unbelievably 
short life-spans in our terms, vanishing, it seems, almost before they're 
bom. I like to think of such research from the particle's point of view, 
though, a consideration I haven't seen mentioned in the few scientific 
journals I read. Keep in mind that according to the Seth material the 
merest particle is basically conscious in its own way. Mesons are 
classes of particles produced from the collisions of protons. Did a 
meson, for example, choose to participate in an atom-smashing 
experiment in order to merely peek in on our gross physical reality for 
much less than the billionth of a second it exists with that identity, 
before it decays into electrons and photons? From its viewpoint, our 
reality might be an incomprehensible to it as its reality is to us — yet the 
two inevitably go together. 

In its way the meson may have all of the "time" it needs, or wants. It 
may look upon our world as one frozen or motionless, upon other 
subatomic particles as very slow-moving indeed, or even faster than it 
is. (As far as "time" goes, some particles live for far less than a 
trillionth of a second.) I'm quite sure, however, that the meson, or any 
short-lived particle, searches out its own kind of value fulfillment while 
here with us. Probable realities, which I haven't even mentioned, must 
be deeply involved also. 

And of course there are all sorts of motion, some of them very 
stable, if still incomprehensible to us. But whereas the meson vanishes 
from our view after its exceedingly brief existence, the electron has an 
"infinite" life-span. Think of the unending varieties of value fulfillment 
it explores in just our world alone! Talk about motion: The average 
electron orbits its atomic-nucleus about a million times each billionth of 
a second (or nanosecond)! 

At this point in my speculations I'm usually led back to Seth's 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


143 


EE (or electromagnetic energy) units, and his CU's (or units of 
consciousness). These nonphysical entities — and many others of a like 
nature — are emanations of consciousness, or All That Is, and in "size" 
rank far below the tiniest particles ever observed in an atom smasher. 
According to Seth, each unit of consciousness "contains within itself 
innately infinite properties of expansion, development and organization; 
yet within itself always maintains the kernel of its own individuality. . . . 
It is aware energy . . . not 'personified' but awareized ." See Session 682 
for Volume 1 of "Unknown " Reality. 

Seth came through with that session on February 13, 1974. Now let 
me close this note with an excerpt from a private session he gave on 
July 3, 1978: 

"The varieties of consciousness — the inner 'psychological particles,' 
the equivalent, say, of the atom or molecule, or proton, neutron or quark 
— those nonphysical, 'charmed,' 'strange,' forms of consciousness that 
make experience go up or down (all with amusement), and around and 
around — are never of course dealt with (by science). 

"If physical form is made up of such multitudinous, invisible 
particles, how much more highly organized must be the inner 
components of consciousness, without whose perceptions matter itself 
would be meaningless. The alliances of consciousness, then, are far 
more vast than those of particles in any form." 

2. I've always liked the way Jane uses the word "eccentric" in relation 
to the abilities of any portion of consciousness to create new versions 
of itself; she's added her own original interpretation of the word to the 
dictionary version of "eccentric" as meaning out of the ordinary, or 
odd, or unconventional. 

She began to refer to the eccentricities of consciousness in October 
1974, following her first conscious experience with her "psychic 
library," and a subsequent transcendental experience in which she 
suddenly began to see, with an astonishing clear vision, the great 
"model" of each portion of the world about her — each person, each 
building, each blade of grass, each bird, for example; our ordinary 
world suddenly appeared quite shabby by contrast. Jane wrote that 
"everyone was a classic model, yet each was also a fantastic eccentric. 
... I saw that each of us is a beloved eccentric not only because we have 
inner models of the 



144 


Jane Roberts 


self, but also the freedom to deviate from them, all of which makes the 
model living and creative in our time." In Psychic Politics, see chapters 
2 and 3. 

3. Now what, I wondered, as I typed this session from my notes, does 
Seth mean here, and in the paragraph above? Sometimes it's difficult to 
pinpoint just what he's saying. His material usually generates more 
questions than answers, but this time he'd outdone himself. I try to 
avoid reading too much into such brief passages, but I felt that if Seth 
answered all of the questions I could ask based upon this session, a 
book would result. Was he referring to another big-bang type of 
"momentous explosion"? I doubted it. Without going into a lot of 
speculative detail, such an event would imply the obliteration of our 
probable physical universe as we know it. Instead, I thought, by 
"another form" he may mean an explosion of ideas or knowledge in our 
reality, with the tremendous objective results that would follow. Such 
results would stem even from "just" a spiritual explosion. (I could also 
see correlations here between Seth's ideas about the primary nature of 
All That Is and the inflationary model of the universe. See Note 2 for 
Session 883.) 

Since it's sometimes difficult to be sure of just what Seth is saying, 
in retrospect I wished that either he'd volunteered more information 
about his explosion-expansion, or that I'd been quick enough to ask him 
to do so. But if words are often necessarily limited and stereotyped, 
they can also be quite elusive — and this is an excellent thing, for it 
shows they're still alive, charged with meanings that change. Basically, 
those meanings can never really be "put into words." 


SESSION 885— October 24, 1979 

9:20 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(Five scheduled session dates have passed since we held the 884th session 
three weeks ago; we missed four of those, but did hold a private, or 
deleted, session on October 10. We've been busy. Jane has been working 
hard on her God of Jane. He's also written a number of poems. [Some 
of them are on reincarnation, and I plan to present them when Seth gets 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


145 


into that subject in Dreams] On October 7, a Sunday, Jane saw for the 
first time the work Sue Watkins has done on Conversations With Seth, 
the book she's writing about the ESP classes Jane used to hold. The 
project is turning out to be much longer than Sue had thought it would 
be, and she still has a few chapters to go. The two women spent the day 
going over the manuscript, and I had a chance to read some of it also. 
Later Sue laughingly admitted that she'd been nervous at first, imagining 
all kinds of adverse reactions either Jane or I might have — but she's 
doing a fine job. She has complete freedom to do Conversations in her 
own way. The next day Jane began making notes for the introduction 
she's to write for the book. 

Four days after Sue's visit we received an enthusiastic letter from an 
independent motion-picture producer and director in Hollywood, in- 
forming us that he's finally succeeding in his quest for an option to the 
film rights to Jane's novel, The Education of Oversoul Seven. This 
event marks the latest step in a rather complicated affair that began 18 
months ago. It means only that our friends in Hollywood and in the 
subsidiary rights department at Prentice-Hall have agreed upon the 
terms of the option; a contract has yet to be signed by all of us. We've 
never asked Seth to comment upon either this project itself or anyone 
involved with it — nor has he volunteered such information, even in 
private sessions. 

During this session hiatus I've been spending much time upon a series 
of letters to the publishers of Seth Speaks in Switzerland and in the 
Netherlands, as well as to those in charge at Prentice-Hall. 1 Last Sat- 
urday night we had a very interesting meeting with a psychologist from 
New York City. Our visitor taped Seth 's copious material, and is to send 
us a transcript of it. 

Today, Jane wrote three more excellent little poems, all of which I hope 
to eventually see published. 2 1 think she grumbled the whole time she was 
doing them, though, since she kept at herself because she wasn't working 
on God of Jane. 

Then tonight she began writing "a fun thing" about our cats, Billy 
and Mitzi, who are brother and sister just 10 months old now: "In the 
beginning, Billy and Mitzi weren't even kittens yet, but only bits of sky 
and cloud that wanted to be pussycats. Not that anyone knew what cats 
were, because God hadn't created any yet. If it hadn't been for Billy and 
Mitzi, cats might not exist at all. ..." The story sprang out of the hilar- 
ious way she's taken to addressing Mitzi in regard to that cat's gifts from 
heaven; I've been telling her that the affair would make a great children's 



146 


Jane Roberts 


book. 3 In the several pages she wrote this evening Jane presented her 
material quite humorously, in a manner reminiscent of, yet different from, 
her second Seven novel, The Further Education of Oversoul Seven, and 
her Emir.' 

Jane surprised me at the last moment by asking if I wanted the session; 
I'd thought she was going to pass it up because of her general discontent 
with herself Seth didn't call this one book dictation, but it certainly 
applies to Dreams. And in his opening delivery he referred to the crea- 
tive freedoms that — seemingly in spite of her conscious fussing — Jane 
had allowed herself today. ) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

A few notes. When Ruburt forgot to worry because "he wasn't 
working," his natural playful creativity bubbled to the surface, and 
today he wrote poetry. Poetry, however, did not fit into his current ideas 
about work, and so that excellent creativity was hardly counted at all. 

In a fashion — in a fashion — the [universe] began in the same way 
that Ruburt' s story this evening began: with the desire to create — out of 
joy, not from a sense of responsibility. 

Many of the ideas in our current book will be accepted by scientists 
most dubiously, though some, of course, will grasp what 1 will be 
saying. It is of course very difficult for you, because (pause) the 
deepest truths cannot be physically proven. (Pause.) Science is used to 
asking quite specific questions, and as Ruburt wrote recently (in God of 
Jane) it usually comes up with very specific answers — even if those 
answers are wrong (with some humor). 

"Wrong" answers can fit together, however, to present a perfect 
picture, an excellent construct of its own — and why not? For any 
answers that do not fit the construct are simply thrown away and never 
appear. So in a fashion we are dealing with what science has thrown 
away. The picture we will end up presenting, then, will certainly not fit 
that of established science. 

However, if objective proof of that nature is considered the priority 
for facts, then as you know science ca nn ot prove its version of the 
[universe's] origin either. It only sets up an hypothesis, which collects 
about it all data that agree, and again ignores what does not fit. 
Moreover, science's thesis meets with no answering affirmation in 
the human heart — and in fact 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


147 


arouses the deepest antipathy, for in his heart man well knows his own 
worth, and realizes that his own consciousness is no accident. 5 The 
psyche, then, possesses within itself an inner affirmation, an affirmation 
that provides the impetus for physical emergence, an affirmation that 
keeps man from being completely blinded by his own mental edifices 
(all with much emphasis and fast delivery. 

(9:33.) There is furthermore a deep, subjective, immaculately 
knowledgeable standard within man's consciousness by which he 
ultimately judges all of the theories and the beliefs of his time, and even 
if his intellect is momentarily swamped by ignoble doctrines, still that 
point of integrity within him is never fooled. 

There is a part of man that Knows, with a capital K. That is the 
portion of him, of course, that is bom and grows to maturity even while 
the lungs or digestive processes do not read learned treatises on the 
body's "machinery," 6 so in our book we will hope to arouse within the 
reader, of whatever persuasion, a kind of subjective evidence, a 
resonance between ideas and being. Many people write, saying that 
they feel as if somehow they have always been acquainted with our 
material — and of course they have, for it represents the inner knowing 
within each individual. (Pause.) In a fashion, creative play is your 
human version of far greater characteristics from which your universe 
itself was formed. There are all kinds of definite, even specific, 
subjective evidence for the nature of your own reality — evidence that is 
readily apparent once you really begin to look for it, particularly by 
comparing the world of your dreams with your daily life. 

In other words, subjective play is the basis for all creativity, of course 
— but far more, it is responsible for the great inner play of subjective 
and objective reality. 

With all due respect, your friend [the psychologist] is, with the best 
of intentions, barking up the wrong psychological tree. He is very 
enthusiastic about his value tests, and his enthusiasm is what is 
important The nature of the subjective mind, however, will never open 
itself to such tests, which represent, more than anything else, a kind of 
mechanical psychology, as if you could break down human values to a 
kind of logical alphabet of psychic atoms and molecules. A good try 
(with humor), but representative of psychology's best attempt to make 
sense of a poor hypothesis. 



148 


Jane Roberts 


You may do what you wish yourselves (about taking the tests), of 
course, but our main purpose is to drive beyond psychology's 
boundaries, and not play pussyfoot among the current psychological 
lilies of the field. 

As for Ruburt, he became overconcemed about work because of the 
contracts (for Mass Events and God of Jane, which we have yet to sign 
with Prentice-Hall), and the foreign hassles. It would be nice if you 
took it for granted that all of those issues were also being creatively 
worked out to your advantage. He is still somewhat afraid of relaxing. It 
makes him feel guilty. His body is responding, however, so let him 
remember that creativity is playful, and that it always surfaces when he 
allows his mind to drop its worries. 

Do you have questions? 

("No, I guess not. ") 

You are doing well, and your notes (for Mass Events) are coming 
together in their own order, so let them. 

I bid you a fond good evening. 

("Thank you, Seth. The same to you.") 

(9:57 p.m. "He was right there, "Jane said with a smile. "That's nice. " 

Our visiting psychologist left us a couple sets of the tests Seth referred 
to. Jane had resisted filling them out during our meeting with him, and 
has little intention of doing so now. Even our guest said the tests were 
very experimental; I believe that actually a colleague of his had devised 
them in large part. I thought they'd been [perhaps unwittingly] oriented 
in certain negative directions — that is, the one taking the test has to 
choose from a series of more or less negative possibilities, listing specific 
choices in an order that depends upon his or her personal belief systems 
*= 1 / think. 

Obviously, Seth didn't follow' through on the statement he'd made near 
the end of the last book session, which we held much earlier this month: 
"Remind me, for our next session, to wind in a discussion of those 
subjective entities as they learned how to translate themselves into physical 
individuals. " However, I didn 't ask him for the material tonight, either. 
Jane hasn't mentioned it. Such omissions can easily result when the 
session routine is interrupted — we simply may not keep a particular 
session that closely in mind as we become involved in other matters during 
a break. The information in question will be most interesting when Seth 
does come through with it.) 



Dreams, "Evolution, "and Value Fulfillment 


149 


VOTES. Session 885 

1 . Some of my letters were triggered on October 9 (this month), when 
Jane and I received our first copies of Seth Spreekt, the Dutch-language 
edition of Seth Speaks. We saw at once that the people at Ankh-Hermes, 
the publishing company in the Netherlands, had cut the book 
considerably. As I wrote in the notes for the private session we held the 
next evening: "Our first reactions were ones of such stunned surprise 
that we didn't even get mad." 

In effect, Ank h-Hermes has published not only a translation but a 
condensation. Considering the eagerness with which we've looked 
forward to having the Seth material published in other languages, and 
the long waiting periods involved, this situation is frustrating indeed. 
Many of my notes, some of which contain excerpts of Seth material, 
have been eliminated. So have large portions of a number of the 
sessions themselves. The Appendix in Seth Spreekt is only 11 pages 
long, chopped down from 67 pages. 

"My own position cannot be as immediate as your own," Seth said 
on October 10. "I respect your emotional reactions, whatever they are, 
and your right to them. (Loudly and amused:) Seth, it seems, speaks a 
bit more briefly in Dutch than he does in English — but the material is 
there, and if the Dutch have cut it, or your notes, it is, in the most basic 
of terms, now, their loss . Agreements of a legal order should, however, 
always be honored, and each society has been built upon that precept. . 

"Whenever a book is translated, it is almost impossible, of course, to 
say the same thing in the same way. Such a book will always be 
expressed through those invisible national characteristics that are so 
intimately involved with language — and obviously, were that not so, no 
book could be understood by someone of a foreign language. There are 
bound to be distortions, but the distortions themselves are meaningful." 

Our editor, Tam Mossman, has verified for us that the contract 
between Prentice-Hall and Ankh-Hermes contains a clause prohibiting 
cutting, unless Jane's and my permission is given. Already those at 
Ankh-Hermes have been asked to withdraw from sale their shortened 
version of Seth Spreekt, and to publish 



150 


Jane Roberts 


a full-length one instead — a very expensive proposition indeed. Jane 
and I regret this, now that our first anger has passed. We're caught 
between the economic realities of the situation as far as Ankh-Hermes 
is concerned, and our own intense desires that translations of the Seth 
books match the original versions as closely as possible. We fully agree 
with Seth that changes and distortions are inevitable as the Seth 
material is moved from English into other languages; we just want 
those alterations kept to a minimum. It appears that language 
difficulties involving publishers and agents led to the whole mix-up to 
begin with. Tam has begun work on a contractual amendment designed 
to prevent more such contusions. And all concerned must wait at least 
another year before a full-length version of Seth Speaks will be 
published in the Dutch language. 

For a number of reasons, hardcover books especially are much more 
expensive in Europe than they are in the United States. In Europe a 
book can be priced at more than double its comparative cost in this 
country. 

2. Jane hasn't given titles to any of her poems of the day. In all three of 
them she celebrated, in a deceptively simple, almost innocently 
mystical way, the changing look of autumn. For example: 

When all of summer's splendid leafery is 
gone then space seems to surround us 
everywhere, far and close. The immense 
vault of the universe turns intimate, 
reaches to our chimneytops in shining 
swirls of sudden openness just outside of 
our back doors. Space from the galaxies 
rushes in to fill the new emptiness 
where a million million leaves were, and 
the valleys hold natural cupfuls of 
space, filled to their transparent brims. 

Jane has been doing 3" x 6" sketches in concert with her poetry 
about nature. She works in brilliant simple colors, obtain- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


151 


ing her effects with porous pens whose inks she can partially blend 
with water. I'd like to frame some of those little pieces, for visually they 
present the same qualities her poetry does verbally. We usually keep her 
sketches covered, however, since their colors begin to fade after a few 
weeks' exposure to light. 

3. I've also suggested to Jane that she might be able to incorpo 
rate into her story about Billy and Mitzi the little poem below. 
It's from a number of sketches and untitled poems she did as a 
birthday book for me last June: 

There seems to be 
no unexpressed self 
in animals, as if 
they are as fully 
themselves in flesh 
as possible, with no 
lag of consciousness 
to fill up, while we 
keep trying to grow 
into something else. 

A.Seven Two, as we call it, was published by Prentice-Hall in May — 
five months ago. Delacorte Press published Emir just last month. 

5. By now, a number of the world's leading scientists in the physical 
disciplines have publicly stated their beliefs that basically 
consciousness plays the primary role in our world and/or universe. For 
reasons too complicated to go into here, this attitude prevails even with 
some mathematicians who seek to penetrate to the core of our reality as 
they understand it. 

However, for every scientist bold enough to think this way, there 
are scores of others who vehemently disagree. For most scientific 
materialists only physical matter is real. For them consciousness is 
nothing more than an epiphenomenon, the passive by-product of the 
brain's physiology and chemical events. They believe that physical 
death is the end of everything, that ultimately all is pointless. They 
derisively call their rebellious col- 



152 


Jane Roberts 


leagues "animists" — those who believe that all life forms and natural 
phenomena have a spiritual origin independent of physical matter. 
(Such heretics are also called "vitalists," a term related to animism, and 
one which also has a long history of scientific contempt behind it.) 

Jane and I have often been most intrigued by the obvious 
contradictions involved here, for what can the materialistic scientists 
use other than mind — or consciousness, that poor epi-phenomenon — to 
study and dissect matter? (Not to mention that innumerable 
experiments have proven that "physical matter" isn't solid or objective 
at all, but "only" energy!) We have, then, the paradox of mind denying 
its own reality, let alone its importance. As far as we know, human 
beings are the only creatures on earth who would seriously engage in 
such learned, futile behavior. It's also very ironic, I think, that the 
materialists spend years acquiring their specialized educations, and 
prestige, both of which they then use to inform us of the ultimate 
futility of all of our endeavors (including their own, of course). But for 
the materialists, the mind-brain duality isn't scientific in the orthodox 
sense. It isn't falsifiable; that is, it cannot be stated under what precise 
conditions the mind-brain duality could be proven false. To which, 
understandably enough, those scientists who do accept the reality of 
mind reply that neither can the idea be falsified that only what is 
"physical" is real. 

Aside from anything Seth has said or ever may say about other 
probable realities, or even about human origins here on earth, I think it 
most risky at this stage in history for anyone — scientist or not — to 
dogmatically state that life has no meaning, or is a farce, or that 
attributes of our reality of which we can only mentally conceive at this 
time do not really exist. Discoveries in the "future" are quite apt to 
prove such limited viewpoints wrong. The history of science itself 
contains many examples of theories and "facts" gone awry. Moreover, 
why would our species want to depend upon as fragile a conception as 
epipheno-menalism through which to comprehend our reality? Or better 
yet, why does it in large part? Truly, our individual and collective 
ignorance of just our own probable reality is most profound at this time 
in our linear history (in those terms). Jane and I wouldn't be surprised if 
ultimately, as a result of mankind's restless search for meaning, we 
didn't end up returning in a new 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


153 


official way to our ancient concepts of spirit within everything, animate 
and inanimate. Such an updated animistic/vitalistic view would take 
into account discoveries ranging from subnuclear events to the largest 
imaginable astronomical processes in our observable universe. Human 
beings do know their own worth, as Seth stated in this session. 

Jane herself commented on these questions in her own way recently 
(as Seth indicated a bit earlier this evening). Her notes will end up in 
one of the later chapters of God of Jane, which she's still roughing out: 

"There is no doubt that we need to believe that life has meaning. 
That belief may well be a biological imperative. If we were as science 
maintains — only creatures formed by elements combining mindlessly 
in a universe itself created by chance, surrounded everywhere by chaos 
— then how could we even conceive of the idea of meaning or order? 

"Science would say that the idea of meaning itself is simply a 
reflection of the state of the brain, as is the illusion of our con- 
sciousness. But a science that disregards consciousness must nec- 
essarily end up creating its own illusion. It ignores the reality of 
experience, the evidence of being, and in so doing it denies rather than 
reinforces life's values." 

6. Seth's passage reminded both of us of "If Toes Had Eyes," a poem 
Jane wrote some four months ago, which she's using in an earlier 
chapter of God of Jane. Here's the first verse: 

If toes had eyes, 

then I could see 

how my feet know where to go, 

but toes are blind. 

And how is it that my tongue 
speaks words it cannot hear? 

Because for all its eloquence, 
the tongue itself is deaf, 
and flaps in sonndlessness. 



154 


Jane Roberts 


SESSION 886— December 3, 1979 

9:20 p.m. MONDAY 

(We've held only three private, or deleted, sessions since Seth came through 
with the last regular one [the 885 th] almost six weeks ago. I just wish I could 
present those sessions here, for in them Seth gave us much valuable 
information — not only about ourselves [including Jane's somewhat impaired 
physical condition, her "stiffness"], but about the myriad interchanges 
occurring constantly between our inner and outer realities, or Frameworks 1 
and 2, as he calls them. Some of that framework material is personal, but 
much more of it is general. 

In the Preface for Dreams / mentioned Jane's idea for a second book of 
poetry. She's progressed with the subject matter for it to the point where Seth 
could remark on November 21: "The book of love poetry is an excellent idea. " 
For now Jane wants the volume to contain some of the poetry she's dedicated 
to me over the years since we met in February 1954. She called Tarn Mossman 
last month about the book, and they discussed possible titles for it. But Jane 
doesn't yet have one she likes. 

In the Preface I also wrote about how I thought the great blossomings of 
religious consciousness and scientific consciousness engendered by the events 
at Three Mile Island and Jonestown! Iran would continue to grow, once born, 
seemingly with lives of their own. Jane and I have watched these effects 
steadily increase since we held the 885th session. Now, our country's initial 
concern over the accident at TMI has grown to include deep questions about 
why we've built so many nuclear energy generating plants near large 
population centers; carrying out a mass evacuation in case of a serious 
accident at any of those sites seems to present a series of insurmountable 
challenges. 

As for Iran, I described how last February [1979] a mob of Marxist-led 
Iranian guerrillas overran the United States Embassy in that country's capital, 
Tehran, and temporarily held prisoner some 70 Americans. I noted that such a 
situation could happen again — and it did: On November 4, Iranian students 
assaulted our embassy compound and took 63 Americans hostage; 3 others 
were imprisoned at Iran's Foreign Ministry. Day I began of a countdown 
toward the release of the hostages (it's day 30 as I write this note). The 
Moslem militants released 13 of our citizens — 5 white women and 8 black men 
— who returned home by Thanksgiving Day, but this time they kept in bondage 
the remaining 53 Americans. Iran holds our entire country in contempt. 



Dreams. "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


155 


This may hardly be original thinking here, but these proliferations of 
consciousness imply some pretty fantastic abilities on the part of we hu- 
mans — for such developments show that even though we live as small 
creatures within the incredible richness of an overall consciousness, or 
All That Is, still our actions can result in that great consciousness ex- 
ploring new areas of itself Quite awesome creative abilities on our part, 
I'd say, and ones that unknowingly we take for granted. We do this all of 
the time, of course, individually and collectively. 

Earlier today Jane and I had talked about Seth's resuming work on 
Dreams. / was still surprised when he did so. Jane had also expressed a 
strong desire for some personal information in the session.) 

(Rather slowly and deliberately to start:) 

Now: In the beginning, there was not God the Father, Allah, 
Zoroaster, Zeus, or Buddha. 1 

In the beginning there was instead, once more, a divine psychological 
gestalt — and by that I mean a being whose reality escapes the definition 
of the word "being," since it is the source from which all being 
emerges. That being exists in a psychological dimension (long pause), a 
spacious present, in which everything that was or is or will be (in your 
terms) is kept in immediate attention, poised in a divine context that is 
characterized (long pause, eyes closed) by such a brilliant concentration 
that the grandest and the lowliest, the largest and the smallest, are 
equally held in a multiloving constant focus. 

Your conceptions of beginnings and endings make an explanation of 
such a situation most difficult, for in your terms the beginning of the 
[universe] is meaningless — that is, in those terms (underlined) there 
was no beginning (intently). 

The [universe] is, as I explained, always coming into existence, and 
each present moment bring its own built-in past along with it. You 
agree on accepting as fact only a small portion of the large available 
data that compose any moment individually or globally. You accept 
only those data that fit in with your ideas of motion in time. As a result, 
for example, your archeological evidence usually presents a picture 
quite in keeping with your ideas of history, geological eras, and so 
forth. 

(9:34.) The conscious mind sees with a spectacular but limited 
scope. It lacks all peripheral vision. I use the term "conscious mind" as 
you define it, for you allow it to accept as evidence only those physical 
data available for the five senses — while the five 



156 


Jane Roberts 


senses, of course, represent only a relatively flat 2 view of reality, that 
deals with the most apparent surface. 

The physical senses are the extensions of inner senses 3 that are, in 
one way or another, a part of each physical species regardless of its 
degree. The inner senses provide all species with an inner method of 
communication. The c-e-l-l-s (spelled out), then, possess inner senses. 

Atoms perceive their own positions, their velocities, motions, the 
nature of their surroundings, the material that they compose. [Your] 
world did not just come together, mindless atoms forming here and 
there, elements coalescing from brainless gases — nor was the world, 
again, created by some distant objectified God who created it part by 
part as in some cosmic assembly line. With defects built in, mind you 
(with some humor), and better models coming every geological season. 

The universe formed out of what God is. 

The universe is the natural extension of divine creativity and intent, 
lovingly formed from the insi de out (underlined) — so there was 
consciousness before there was matter, and not the other way around. 

In certain basic and vital ways, your own consciousness is a portion 
of that divine gestalt. In the terms of your earthly experience, it is a 
metaphysical, a scientific, and a creative error to separate matter from 
consciousness, for consciousness materializes itself as matter in 
physical life. 

(Long pause.) Your consciousness will survive your body's death, but 
it will also take on another kind of form — a form that is itself composed 
of "units of consciousness." You have a propensity for wanting to think 
in terms of hierarchies of consciousness, with humanity at the top of the 
list, in global terms. The Bible, for example, says that man is put in 
dominion over the animals, and it seems as if upgrading the 
consciousnesses of animals must somehow degrade your own. The 
divine gestalt, however, is expressed in such a way that its quality 
(pause) is undiluted. It cannot be watered down, so that in basic terms 
one portion of existence is somehow up or down the scale from another. 
It is all Grade A (with amusement). 

You limit the capacity of your conscious mind by refusing to allow it 
to use a larger scope of attention, so that you have remained closed and 
ignorant about the different, varied, but rich 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


157 


experiences of other species: They do appear beneath you. You have 
allowed a certain stubborn literal-mindedness to provide you with 
definitions that served to categorize rather than illuminate other 
realities beside your own. 

(Long pause at 9:55.) In the beginning, then, there was a subjective 
world that became objective. Matter was not yet permanent, in your 
terms, for consciousness was not yet as stable there. In the beginning, 
then, there was a dream world, in which consciousness formed a dream 
of physical reality, and gradually became awake within that world. 

Mountains rose and tumbled. Oceans filled. Tidal waves thundered. 
Islands appeared. The seasons themselves were not stable. In your 
terms the magnetic fields themselves fluctuated — but all of the species 
were there at the beginning, though in the same fashion, for as the 
dream world broke through into physical reality there was all of the 
tumultuous excitement and confusion with which a mass creative event 
is achieved. There was much greater plasticity, motion, variety, give- 
and-take, as consciousness experimented with its own forms. The 
species and environment together formed themselves in concert, in 
glorious combination, so that each fulfilled the requirements of its own 
existence while adding to the fulfillment of all other portions of 
physical reality (all very intently, and with many gestures). 

That kind of an event simply cannot fit into your concepts of "the 
beginning of the world," with consciousness arising out of matter 
almost as a second thought, or with an exteriorized God initiating a 
divine but mechanistic natural world. 

(Pause.) Nor can this concept fit into your versions of good and evil, 
as I will explain later in this book. God, or All That Is, is in the deepest 
sense completed, and yet uncompleted. Again, I am aware of the 
contradiction that seems to be presented to your minds. In a sense, 
however (underlined), a creative product, say, helps complete an artist, 
while of course the artist can never be completed. All That is, or God, in 
a certain fashion, now (underlined) — and this is qualified — leams as 
you learn, and makes adjustments according to your knowledge. We 
must be very careful here, for delusions of divinity come sometimes too 
easily, but in a basic sense you all carry within yourselves the 
undeniable mark of All That Is — and an inbuilt capacity — capacity — to 
glimpse in your own terms undeniable evidence of 



158 


Jane Roberts 


your own greater existence. You are as close to the beginning of [your] 
world as Adam and Eve were, or as the Romans, or as the Egyptians or 
Sumerians. The beginning of the world is just a step outside the 
moment. 

I have a purpose in this book — for this is dictation — and that purpose 
is to change your ideas of yourselves, by showing you a truer picture of 
your history both in terms of your immortal consciousness and your 
physical heritage. 

End of dictation. 

(10:13. After giving some material for Jane, Seth ended the session at 
10:32 p.m. "I had no idea he was going to do it that way, " Jane said. 
"I'm so glad to be back on the book. ") 


NOTES. Session 886 

1. Since according to Seth something like a basic religious awareness 
has always been with mankind, Seth here indicates a few historical and 
mythological signposts of that intuitive understanding. 

A. God the Father. There's no way to assign any reasonably 
accurate date to when God the Father created all things, as de 
scribed in Genesis, the first book of the Bible. (The Biblical ac 
count of Creation makes evolution an impossibility.) Nor can the 
date of Creation be arrived at by counting the Bible's lists of 
generations, as given in the Old Testament, since these may well 
be incomplete. 

B. Mohammed (a.d. 5707-632), the Prophet of Islam, 

stressed the uniqueness of the god Allah, whose name was al 
ready well known in pre-Islamic Arabia. 

C. Zoroaster (628? — 551? B.C.) was a Persian religious teacher 
and prophet. 

D. Zeus was the supreme god of the ancient Greeks, who 
worshipped him in connection with almost every facet of daily 
life. He was the son of Cronus and Rhea, and the husband of his 
sister Hera. The Romans identified Zeus with their own supreme 
god, Jupiter, or Jove. 

E. Buddha. This is the title given to Siddhartha Gautama, 
the founder of Buddhism. He was a religious teacher and phi 
losopher who lived in India, probably from 563 to 483 B.C. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


159 


2.1 see correlations between the "Hat view of reality" given to us by our 
physical senses, as Seth maintains, and the "flat" view of the universe 
that cosmologists perceive when they look way out into space. In his 
general theory of relativity, Einstein postulated that space can curve, 
and this has been shown to happen near our sun. Yet when scientists 
examine our universe of galaxies and clusters of galaxies, they see 
space as essentially Hat, instead of curving in upon itself as it should 
over those enormous distances. Nor can the big-bang theory of the 
origin of the universe account for the homogeneity of a flat universe. 
The inflationary model can explain both the appearance of flatness and 
homogeneity — but, like all theories, it poses other problems that have 
yet to be resolved. 

3. Jane gave Seth's partial list of the inner senses in Chapter Nineteen of 
The Seth Material, which was published back in 1970. 


SESSION 887— December 5, 1979 

9:17 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(This noon Jane and I signed our wills, with our attorney and his wife 
serving as witnesses. Jane had been somewhat depressed this morning, 
and her writing hadn't gone well. The obvious implications posed by the 
wills did nothing to cheer her up. ' Still, trusting her impulses, she slept 
for a couple of hours this afternoon — then, perversely, wasn't happy with 
herself for doing so when she woke up. She was quieter than usual 
through supper, although she said she wanted to hold the session. 

Her delivery as Seth was for the most part comparatively subdued.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Now: Dictation. (With many pauses:) When I speak of the dream 
world, I am not referring to some imaginary realm, but to the kind of 
world of ideas, of thoughts, of mental actions, out of which all form as 
you think of it emerges. In actuality this is an inner universe rather than 
an inner world. Your physical reality is but one materialization of that 
inner organization. All possible civilizations exist first in that realm of 
inner mind. 

(Long pause.) In the beginning, then, the species did not have 



160 


Jane Roberts 


the kinds of forms they do now. They had pseudoforms — dream 
bodies, if you prefer — and they could not physically reproduce 
themselves. Their experience of time was entirely different, and in the 
beginning the entire earth operated in a kind of dream time. In your 
terms, this meant that time could be quickened, or lengthened. It was a 
kind of psychological time. 

Again, forms appeared and disappeared. (Pause.) In your terms of 
time, however, the dream bodies took on physical forms. Physical 
reproduction was impossible. That did not happen to all of the species 
at once, however. For a while, then, the earth had a mixed population of 
species who had completely taken on physical forms, and species who 
had not. The forms, however, whether physical or not, were complete 
in themselves. Birds were birds, and fish fish. 

(9:30.) In the beginning there were also species of various other 
kinds: combinations of man-animal and animal-man, and many other 
"crossbreed" species, some of fairly long duration in your terms. This 
applies to all areas. There were dream trees, with dream foliage, that 
gradually became aware within that dream (with gentle emphasis), 
turning physical, focusing more and more in physical reality, until their 
dream seeds finally brought forth physical trees. 

There may be other terms I could use, in some ways more 
advantageous than the term, "the dream world." I am emphasizing this 
dream connection, however, because the dream state is one familiar to 
each reader, and it represents your closest touchstone to the kind of 
subjective reality from which your physical world emerges. The dream 
state appears chaotic, shadowy, suspicious, or even meaningless, 
precisely because in life you are so brilliantly focused in daily reality 
that dreams appear to be sta-ticky objective background noise, left over 
from when you sleep. But that is how physical experience would seem 
to someone not focused in it, or inexperienced with its organization. 

(Pause.) Again, the world came into being in the same way that any 
idea does. The physical world expands in the same way that any idea 
does. I am speaking for your edification of the world you recognize, of 
the earth you know, but there are probable earths, of course, as real as 
your own. They coexist with your own, and they are all in one way or 
another connected. 



Dreams, "Evolution." and Value Fulfillment 


161 


Each one carries hints and clues about the others. In the terms used by 
science, there was no evolution in linear terms, but vast (long pause) 
explosions of consciousness, expansions of capacities, unfoldings on 
the parts of all species, and these still continue. They are the inner 
manipulations with which consciousness presents itself. 

Later in the book I will discuss some of these, but they represent 
intuitive leaps of new understandings. The pattern of animal behavior, 
for example, is not at all as set and finished as you suppose. Your 
physical experience is a combination of dream events interlaced with 
what you call objective acts. 

Were it not for your myths, you would have discovered no "facts." 

Give us a moment. . . . End of dictation. 

(9:48. Now Seth came through with a rather long dissertation con- 
cerning the psychological manipulations Jane and I make between 
Frameworks 1 and 2, and how we can help each other during those 
transitions. End at 10:13 p.m.) 


NOTE. Session 887 

1 . In this note I describe events that are of great importance to Jane and 
me. 

Even though making our wills led us to think of our deaths, in 
ordinary terms, still that making implies both order and things 
accomplished during our lifetimes. We have achieved a situation 
beneficial to all — for Jane's will and my own each declares that upon 
the death of the survivor of the two of us, our estate is to be donated to 
the Manuscripts and Archives division of Yale University Library, in 
New Elaven, Connecticut. Our physical effects, even including the hill 
house and the car, are few. But our creative work is everything, and so 
it, and whatever pertains to it, go to a place where all will be preserved 
and protected, yet made available for study by researchers and lay 
people alike as it is transmitted there. 

The collection will include our family trees; my father's journals 
and photographs; Jane's and my own grade-school, high-school, 
college, and family data; our youthful creative efforts in writing and 
painting; the comic books and other commercial 



162 


Jane Roberts 


artwork I produced; our early published and unpublished short stories; 
my original notes for the sessions; session transcripts, whether 
published or unpublished, "regular," private, or from ESP class; tapes, 
including those made in class of Jane speaking for Seth and/or singing 
in Sumari; our notes, dream records, journals, and manuscripts; our 
sketches and paintings; Jane's extensive poetry; our business 
correspondence; books, contracts, and files; newsletters about the Seth 
material, published in the United States and abroad (independently of 
Jane and me); the greater number of letters from readers — in short, a 
mass of material showing how our separate beginnings flowed together 
and resulted in the production of a joint lifework. 

At first we thought of keeping the collection closed until after our 
deaths, as donors usually request to be done, but we've decided to make 
everything accessible as soon as we can, both for scholarship and for 
study by the public. To make this possible, we'll be transferring copies 
of many of our papers and tapes to the library while keeping the 
originals with us to work with during our lifetimes. This decision is 
especially apropos where we have but one copy of the material in 
question: We like knowing that "security copies" will be on file 
elsewhere — as with Jane's journals, for example, and many of my own 
notes. 

To make the copies I plan to install equipment here in the house, so 
that I can work at the job whenever I have a minute. The task will take 
lots of time — perhaps several years — and I may have to hire help; it 
will cost us something to copy the many thousands of papers for the 
library. Others are to duplicate tapes and photographs for us. 

Jane's editor, Tam Mossman, who graduated from Yale, helped us 
contact officials at Sterling Memorial a year ago (in December 1978). 
Jane and I completed arrangements after that, when those at the library 
explained how our collection would complement others already there. 
An archivist from Manuscripts and Archives has visited us to get a 
rough idea of the amount of material we have to offer. We don't know 
when our work will actually be ready for study: First we must get it to 
the library, and then the staff must see to its processing — which will be 
quite a project in itself. Jane and I are most pleased that the Seth 
material and everything connected with it are to be preserved. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


163 


SESSION 888— December 10, 1979 

9:04 p.m. MONDAY 

(Last Saturday evening we were visited by Dr. LeRoy Guy [I'll call him], 
a professor of psychology at a well-known nearby university. He'd written 
Jane on November 16. When Jane called Dr. Guy in return, he told her 
that he'd contacted her at the behest of a Dr. Camper [another pseud- 
onym]. ' Dr. Camper, a professor of sociology at a midwestem university, 
had asked Dr. Guy to ask Jane to be tested for her psychic ability. [The 
two scientists haven 't met personally, by the way.] 

The evening had been very pleasant. Dr. Guy knows a number of 
people who are prominent in parapsychology. Both Dr. Guy and Dr. 
Camper have a strong interest in magic. Seth came through several times, 
delivering beautifully organized little dissertations to Dr. Guy on how he 
might relax enough to allow the psychic signs that he's so interested in to 
come through. Strangely enough, Dr. Guy didn't bring a tape recorder 
with him. We didn't use one either, and so for the first time in a long 
while Seth's material disappeared as rapidly as it was given — an odd 
experience for us. Seth also discussed with Dr. Guy the practice of, and 
the motivations behind, the art of magic. And in return for Seth speak- 
ing, Dr. Guy staged his own little magic show for Jane and me — to our 
amazement and intense interest — as the three of us sat around the living- 
room table. 

As Jane commented afterward, LeRoy Guy said not a single word to 
us about his reaction to Seth, although I'd watched him pay the same rapt 
attention to that personality as had many others. "I suppose he'll write to 
Camper now, " Jane said. We hadn't asked Dr. Guy what he intended to 
do. For that matter, we hadn't even asked him exactly what Dr. Camper 
wanted him to find out about Jane and Seth — or even me. Dr. Guy left 
us a book written by a scientist about a famous medium, and I'll be 
mailing it back to him as soon as we've read it.) 

(With a smile:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Dictation: You can only locate or pinpoint an event that falls one 
way or another into the range of your perception. 

You cannot really locate or pinpoint microscopic or macroscopic 
events with any precision. You cannot pinpoint "invisible" events, for 
even as your sophisticated instruments perceive them, they have not 
met them in the same time scheme. I want 



164 


Jane Roberts 


to deal briefly with such ideas, so that later we can discuss the location 
of the universe. 

Any event that you perceive is only a portion of the true di- 
mensionality of that event. The observer and the object perceived are a 
part of the same event, each changing the other. This interrelationship 
always exists in any system of reality and at any level of activity. In 
certain terms, for example, even an electron "knows" it is being 
observed through your instrument. The electrons within the instrument 
itself have a relationship with the electron that scientists may be trying 
to "isolate" for examination. 

Quite apart from that, however, there is what we will call for now the 
collective unconscious of all of the electrons that compose the entire 
seemingly separate event of the scientists observing the electron. In 
your range of activity you can adequately identify events, project them 
in time and space, only by isolating certain portions of much larger and 
much smaller events, and recognizing a highly specific order of events 
as real. 

(Pause, one of many.) Light can be defined as a wave or as a 
particle, 2 and the same is true in many other instances. Consciousness, 
for example, can be defined as a wave or as a particle, for it can operate 
as either, and appear as either, even though its true definition would 
have to include the creative capacity to shape itself into such forms. 

You cannot pinpoint the beginning of the universe — for (suddenly 
louder) that beginning is simultaneously too vast and too small to be 
contained in any of your specifications. While everything seems neat 
and tidy within those specifications, and whole, you operate with 
brilliant nonchalance in the theater of time and space. Time and space 
are each the result of psychological properties. (Pause.) When you ask 
how old is the universe, or how old is the world, then you are taking it 
for granted that time and space are somehow or other almost absolute 
qualities. You are asking for answers that can only be found by going 
outside of the context of usual experience — for within that experience 
you are always led back to beginnings and endings, consecutive mo- 
ments, and a world that seems to have within it no evidences of any 
other source. 

(Pause at 9:23.) The physical world as you know it is unique, vital to 
the importance of the universe itself. It is an integral part 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


165 


of that universe, and yet it is also quite its own reality. That reality is 
dependent upon the perceptions of each kind of life that composes it. It 
is a creation of consciousness, rising into one unique kind of expression 
from that divine gestalt of being — and that divine gestalt of being is of 
such unimaginable dimensions that its entire reality cannot appear 
within any one of its own realities, its own worlds. 

Space, again, is a psychological property. So is time. The universe 
did not, then, begin at some specified point in time, or at any particular 
location in space — for (louder) it is true to say that all of space and all 
of time appeared simultaneously, and appear simultaneously. 

You cannot pinpoint the location of consciousness. 

(Long pause.) When you are dreaming you cannot pinpoint your 
dream location in the same way that you can determine, say, the chair 
or the bureau that may sit on the floor by the bed in which you dream. 
That inner location is real, however, and meaningful activity can take 
place within it. Physical space exists in the same manner, except that it 
is a mass psychologically shared property — but at one "time" in the 
beginning this was not so. 

In the beginning, physical space had the qualities that dream space 
has to you now. It seemed to have a more private nature, and only 
gradually, in those terms, did it become publicly shared. 

(Pause.) What was such a world like, and how can you possibly 
relate it to the world that you know? 

End of chapter. 



3 

CHAPTER 

Sleepwalkers. The World 
in Early Trance. The 
Awakening of the Species 


(9:36.) Chapter Three. 

("Three?") 

Three: "Sleepwalkers. The World in Early Trance. The Awakening of 
the Species." Those are the headings. 

(Pause.) Give us a moment. . . . You have taught yourselves to 
respond to certain neural patterns, and to ignore alternate ones that now 
simply operate as background activity. That background activity, 
however, supports a million forces: the neural stimuli that you accept as 
biologically real. Those other background stimuli are now quite 
difficult for you to identify, but they are always there in the [hinterland] 
of your waking consciousness, like dream chatter way beneath your 
usual associations. 

Neurologically, you tune into only a portion of your body's reality 
and are ignorant of the great, tiny but tumultuous communications that 
are ever flying back and forth in the microscopic but vital cellular 
world. 


166 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


167 


Electrons in your terms are precognitive, and so is your cellular 
consciousness. Your body's relative permanence in time is dependent 
upon the electron's magnificent behavior as it deals with probabilities. 
(Pause.) The cell's stability, and its reliability in the bodily 
environment, is dependent upon its i nn ate properties of instant 
communication and instant decision, for each cell is in communication 
with all others and is united with all others through fields of 
consciousness, 3 in which each entity of whatever degree plays a part. 

At one level your cells obey the rules of time, but on other levels 
they defy it. All of these communications are a part of the human parcel 
of reality, and they all exist beneath what you think of as normal 
consciousness. Events are not built up initially from physical particles. 
They are the result of psychological activity. 

(9:51.) Give us a moment. . . . "In the beginning" you were only 
aware of that psychological activity. It had not "as yet" thickened itself 
into form. The form was there, but it was not manifest (intently). I do 
not particularly like the analogy, but it is useful: Instead of small 
particles (Long pause), you had small units of consciousness gradually 
building themselves into large ones — but a smaller unit of 
consciousness, you see, is not "less than" a larger unit, for each unit of 
consciousness contains within itself the innate (underlined) heritage of 
All That Is. 

You think of the conscious mind, as you know it, as the only kind of 
consciousness with a deliberate intent, awareness of itself as itself, and 
with a capacity for logic and the appreciation of symbolism. That only 
seems true because of your particular range of activity, and because you 
can only pinpoint events within a particular psychological spectrum. 

End of dictation. For our friend: 

(10:01. Now Seth gave a few paragraphs for Jane, then said good 
night at 10:10 p.m. Even with the many pauses she'd used this evening 
— most of which I didn't indicate — Jane's delivery had often been quite 
intent and meaningful. In their own way the pauses served as additional 
punctuation and emphasis for some of Seth's information.) 



168 


Jane Roberts 


NOTES. Session 888 

l.Last summer, through the mail, Jane and I had our own encounters 
with Dr. Camper. Those events are too complicated to go into here, but 
Jane is devoting considerable space to them in her own God of Jane. 
2.Seth should have said that light can be defined as being made up of 
waves or particles, but he didn't put it quite that way, and I let stand 
what he did say. He gave me a knowing, half-smiling look while 
delivering this paragraph, for it was obvious that his material was 
related to a note I'd shown Jane today — one I'm finishing for Mass 
Events. In it, I'm trying to deal very simply with both the uncertainty 
principle and the complementarity of light, among other tenets of 
physics. (It will be Note 2 for Session 823.) 

In fact, I believe that a good amount of Seth's material this evening 
was inspired by my struggles with that note. Such interchanges among 
Jane, Seth, and me — and among books — often take place. 

3. Seth's "fields of consciousness" sounds like an elaboration of 
field theory in physics. In physics, however, the field is called 
"energy and momentum," not consciousness. 


SESSION 889— December 17, 1979 

8:45 p.m. MONDAY 

(On December 13 Jane came up with her best title yet for the book of 
poetry she's putting together: If We Live Again: Love's Lives and 
Probable Selves. She's writing some excellent new poems for the book, 
besides working on God of Jane. My wife is also doing some poetry as 
a Christmas present for me — though she's very secretive about this activ- 
ity; I'm not supposed to know what she's up to. 

Last night was our coldest of the winter, I believe — about 9° — and 
this evening wasn't much warmer as we sat for the session. However, the 
season has been exceptionally mild in our area. The ground has been 
bare of snow most oj the time — so far! 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


169 


Jane called me at 8:30 to say that she was ready for the session. "I'd 
better get started, " she said. "Otherwise I might put it off, I'm getting so 
relaxed. I've been picking up some great stuff from Seth on the book, 
too. ..." And that's why we missed the regularly scheduled session for 
last Wednesday evening: She became so relaxed she didn't care to focus 
on going into trance.) 

Dictation. 

Now: I call the building blocks of matter CU's — units of con- 
sciousness. They form physical matter as it exists in your understanding 
and experience. Units of consciousness also form other kinds of matter 
that you do not perceive. 1 

CU's can also operate as "particles" or as "waves." Whichever way 
they operate, they are aware of their own existences. When CU's 
operate as particles, in your terms, they build up a continuity in time. 
They take on the characteristics of particularity. They identify 
themselves by the establishment of specific boundaries. 

(Long pause.) They take certain forms, then, when they operate as 
particles, and experience their reality from "the center of' those forms. 
They concentrate upon, or focus upon, their unique specificiations. 
They become in vour terms (underlined) individual. 

When CU's operate as waves, however, they do not set up any 
boundaries about their own self-awareness — and when operating as 
waves CU's can indeed be in more than one place at one time. 

I understand that this is somewhat difficult material to comprehend. 
However (pause), in its purest form a unit of consciousness can be in 
all places at the same time (forcefully). It becomes beside the point, 
then, to say that when it operates as a wave a unit of consciousness is 
precognitive, or clairvoyant, since it has the capacity to be in all places 
and all times simultaneously. 

Those units of consciousness are the building blocks for the physical 
material of your body, for the trees and rocks, the oceans, the 
continents, and the very manifestation of space itself as you understand 
it 

(Seth repeated the last phrase very loudly when I failed to understand 
him the first time.) 

These CU's can operate as separate entities, as identities, or they can 
flow together in a vast, harmonious wave of activity, as 



170 


Jane Roberts 


a force. Period. Actually, units of consciousness operate in both ways 
all of the time. No identity, once "formed," is ever annihilated, for its 
existence is indelibly a part of "the entire wave of consciousness to 
which it belongs." 

(Pause at 9:04, one of many.) Each "particleized" unit, however, rides 
the continual thrust set up by fields of consciousness, in which wave 
and particle both belong. Each particleized unit of consciousness 
contains within it inherently the knowledge of all other such particles — 
for at other levels, again, the units are operating as waves. Basically the 
units move faster than light, 2 slowing down, in your terms, to form 
matter. (Pause.) These units can be considered, again, as entities or as 
forces, and they can operate as either. Metaphysically, they can be 
thought of as the point at which All That Is acts to form [your] world — 
the immediate contact of a never-ending creative inspiration, coming 
into mental focus, the metamorphosis of certainly divine origin that 
brings the physical world into existence from the greater reality of 
divine fact. Scientifically, again, the units can be thought of as building 
blocks of matter. Ethically, the CU's represent the spectacular 
foundations of the world in value fulfillment, for each unit of 
consciousness is related to each other, a part of the other, each 
participating in the entire gestalt of mortal experience. And we will see 
how this applies to your attitudes toward specieshood, and man's 
relationship with other conscious entities and the planet he shares with 
them. 

(Pause at 9:17. Once again, as it often has since she began dictating 
this book, Jane's delivery for Seth had taken on a charged and inspired 
cast. The words in paragraphs like the one above rolled out of her in a 
strong and almost grand manner. It was easy to tell that she enjoyed 
working on Dreams — that she gave permission to be carried away if 
need be. Perhaps her method of presentation was in keeping with Seth's 
own pronouncement at the beginning of his Preface, almost three months 
ago: "This book will be my most ambitious project thus far. Period. ") 

In the beginning CU's, then, units of consciousness, existing within a 
divine psychological gestalt, endowed with the unimaginable creativity 
of that sublime identity, began themselves to create, to explore, and to 
fulfill those innate values by which they were characterized. Operating 
both as waves and particles, directed in part by their own creative 
restlessness, and directed in part by the unquenchable creativity of All 
That Is, they em- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


171 


barked upon the project that brought time and space and your entire 
[universe] into being. They were the first entities, then. 

I want you to try and imagine a situation in which (long pause) there 
exists a psychological force that includes within its capabilities the 
ability to act simultaneously on the most microscopic and the most 
macroscopic levels; that can form within itself (long pause, eyes 
closed) a million separate inviolate unique identities, and that can still 
operate as a part of those identities, and as a larger unit that is their 
source — in which case it is a wave from which the particles emerge. 
That description fits our units of consciousness. 

(9:26.) They built your world from the inside out. As physical 
creatures, they focused upon what you think of as physical identities: 
separate, individual differences, endowing each physical consciousness 
with its own original variations and creative potentials, its own 
opportunity for completely original experience, and a viewpoint or 
platform from which to participate in reality — one that at that level 
could not be experienced in the same way by any other individual (all 
very intently). This is [the] privileged, always new 7 , private and 
immediate, direct experience of any individual of any species, or of any 
degree, as it encounters the objective universe. 

At other levels, while each individuality is maintained, it rides the 
wavelike formations of consciousness. It is everywhere at once, and the 
units of consciousness that make up your cells know the positions of all 
other such units, both in time and in space. 

In the beginning, then, these units operated both as identities or 
particles, and as waves. The main concentration was not yet physical in 
your terms. What you now think of as the dream state was the waking 
one, for it was still the recognized form of purposeful activity, 
creativity, and power. The dream state continues to be a connective 
between the two realities, and as a species you literally learned to walk 
by first being sleepwalkers. You walked in your sleep. You dreamed 
your languages. You spoke in your dreams and later wrote down the 
alphabets — and your knowledge and your intellect have always been 
fired, sharpened, propelled by the great inner reality from which your 
minds emerged. 

Physical matter by itself could never produce consciousness. 



172 


Jane Roberts 


One mind alone could not come into being from chance alone; one 
thought could not leap from an infinite number of nerve ends, if matter 
itself was not initially alive with consciousness, packed with the intent 
to be. A man who believes life has little meaning quickly leaves life — 
and a meaningless existence could never produce life (intently). Nor 
was the universe created for one species alone, by a God who is simply 
a supervision of the same species — as willful and destructive as man at 
his worst. 

(9:45.) Instead, you have an inner dimension of activity, a vast field 
of multidimensional creativity, a Creator that becomes a portion of each 
of its creations, and yet a Creator that is greater than the sum of its 
parts: a Creator that can know itself as a mouse in a field, or as the 
field, or as the continent upon which the field rests, or as the planet that 
holds the continent, or as the universe that holds the world — a force that 
is whole yet divisible, that is one and the inconceivably many, a force 
that is eternal and mortal at once, a force that plunges headlong into its 
own creativity, forming the seasons and experiencing them as well, 
glorifying in individuation, and yet always aware of the great unity that 
is within and behind and through all experiences of individuality: a 
force from [which] each moment pasts and futures flow out in every 
conceivable direction. 

(Jane delivered that whole paragraph with great flowing intensity, 
and I've punctuated it to the best of my ability just as it came through 
her. I don't think I've ever heard her speak more eloquently for Seth, and 
with more certainty. This book has turned her on.) 

(Long pause.) In your terms of time, however, we will speak of a 
beginning, and in that beginning it was early man's dreams that allowed 
him to cope with physical reality. The dream world was his original 
learning ground. In times of drought he would dream of the location of 
water. In times of famine he would dream of the location of food. That 
is, his dreaming allowed him to clairvoyantly view the body of land. He 
would not waste time in the trial-and-error procedures that you now 
take for granted. In dreams his consciousness operated as a wave. 

In those early times all species shared their dreams in a way that is 
now quite unconscious for your kind, so that in dreams man inquired of 
the animals also — long before he learned to follow the animal tracks, 
for example. Where is there food or water? What is the lay of the land? 
Man explored the planet because his dreams told him that the land was 
there. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


173 


People were not nearly as isolated as it now appears, for in their 
dreams early men communicated their various locations, the symbols of 
their cultures and understanding, the nature of their arts. All of the 
inventions that you often think now happened quite by chance — the 
discovery of anything from the first tool to the importance of fire, or the 
coming of the Iron Age or whatever — all of that inventiveness was the 
result of the inspiration and communication of the dream world. Man 
dreamed his world and then created it, and the units of consciousness 
first dreamed man and all of the other species that you know. 

(Pause at 10:02.) There is a point here that I want to emphasize 
before we go too far, and it is this: The dream world is not an aimless, 
nonlogical, unintellectual field of activity. It is only that your own 
perspective closes out much of its vast reality, for the dreaming intellect 
can put your computers to shame. I am not, therefore, putting the 
intellectual capacities in the background — but I am saying that they 
emerge as you know them because of the dreaming seifs uninterrupted 
use of the full power of the united intellect and intuitions. 

The intellectual abilities as you know them (pause) cannot compare 
to those greater capacities that are a part of your own inner reality. 

End of dictation. 

("Okay. ") 

(10:08. Now Seth came though with a paragraph — here deleted — 
for Jane and me. Then:) 

Do you have questions? 

("What do you think of my remarks about watching the news on 
television every day? " 3 ) 

It makes little difference whether you watch the news or not — but it 
makes all the difference in the world what you think of world events. 

The perspective from which you watch world events is vital, and it is 
true that communication now brings to the conscious mind a far greater 
barrage than before. But it is also a barrage that makes man see his own 
activities, and even with the growth of the new nationalism in the Third 
World, those nations begin from a new perspective, in which the eyes 
of the world are indeed upon them. 

Your country faces the results of its own policies — its greed as well 
as its good intent, but it is out in the open in a new way. The 



174 


Jane Roberts 


world will be seen as one, but there may be changes in the overall tax 
assessments along the way, as those who have not paid much, pay 
more. 

The results of fanaticism are also out in the open. Never before, in 
your terms, has the private person been able to see a picture of the mass 
world in such a way, or been forced to identify with the policies of his 
or her government. That in itself is a creative achievement, and means 
that man is not closing his eyes to the inequities of his world. 

End of session. A fond good evening. 

("The same to you, Seth. Thank you very much. ") 

(10:18 p.m. "Talk about energy!" Jane exclaimed as soon as she was 
out of her excellent trance state. "I just had the feeling we were getting 
some great stuff— I just had the feeling. I don't remember what he said 
that well, but I just felt that terrific conviction. You know what I mean ? " 

I certainly did. I congratulated her upon the session.) 


NOTES. Session 889 

1. Later, I asked Seth to comment upon his most intriguing 
statement. His answer was brief, for insertion here, and as much 
as I wanted to I didn't ask him to enlarge upon it. However, I'm 
sure that the subject of "other kinds of matter" is one with almost 
endless ramifications. Seth: 

"Units of consciousness do help form different kinds of physical 
realities — as indeed Ruburt has himself hinted in some of his poetry. 
There are many dimensions that are as physical, so to speak, as your 
own world, but if you are not focused in them you would not at all be 
aware of their existence, but perceive only empty space. 

"Nothing in the universe is ever lost, or mislaid, or wasted, so the 
energy of your own thoughts, while they are still your own thoughts, 
helps to form the natural attributes of physical realities that you do not 
perceive. So is your own world formed by units of consciousness. Its 
natural elements are the glistening remnants of other units of 
consciousness that you do not see." 

2. According to Albert Einstein, no material particle in our uni 
verse can be accelerated from rest to quite the speed of light, 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


175 


which is about 186,000 miles per second in a vacuum. However, as I 
wrote in Note 1 for Session 709, in Volume 2 of "Unknown" Reality, 
"supposed faster-than-light particles are thought to be possible within 
the context of Einstein's special theory of relativity." 

Seth gave excellent material on the units of consciousness in both 
volumes of "Unknown " Reality. In Volume 1 , for example, see Session 
682 for February 13, 1974. 

3. Earlier this evening I'd wondered to Jane why we keep dosing 
ourselves with the endless barrage of bad news the TV networks offer 
us as we eat supper each day. The hostage crisis in Iran is a case in 
point. I remarked that most of our world's problems seem to result from 
Framework- 1 thinking, that our species is so steeped in such conscious- 
mind behavior — locally, nationally, and worldwide — that there seems 
little chance of our ever breaking out of that iron pattern. I further told 
Jane that our history reflects our stubborn refusal to modify to any 
significant degree our great reliance upon Framework- 1 manipulations, 
even though I grant that there are many complicated reasons for such 
long-term mass behavior. 

I also felt that my question grew out of Jane's and my own recent 
efforts to improve our habitual thinking patterns, to draw from 
Framework 2 more of those elements that will help us create the daily 
results we really want. As an aid, I use a set of resolutions Seth gave us 
last January 1 — although, oddly, Jane doesn't pay that much attention to 
them. However, both of us have noticed definite improvements lately in 
attitude and peace of mind. 


SESSION 890— December 19, 1979 

9:17 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(Jane was in a "bitchy" mood as session time approached. Her manner 
was both funny and understandably sharp when I asked her if she had 
any questions for Seth tonight. She'd wanted to start the session at 8 
o'clock, but it hadn't worked out. "But now I'm beginning to feel him 
around," she said at 9:10. Her delivery was quite slow as the session 
opened.) 



176 


Jane Roberts 


Now: Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Dictation: This inner universe (pause) is a gestalt formed by fields of 
awareized energy that contains what we will call "information" for now 
— but we will have some comments later, for this is not the kind of 
information you are used to. 

Each unit of consciousness inherently possesses within itself all of 
the information available to the whole, and its specific nature when it 
operates as a particle rests upon that great "body" of inner knowledge. 
Any one such particle can be where it "is," be what it is, and be when it 
is only because the positions, relative positions, and situations of all 
other such particles are known. 

(Long pause at 9:23.) In the deepest terms, again, your physical 
world is beginning at each point at which these units of consciousness 
assert themselves to form physical reality. Otherwise, life would not be 
"handed down" through the generations. Each unit of consciousness (or 
CU) intensifies, magnifies its own intent to be — and, you might say, 
works up from within itself an explosive spark of primal desire that 
"explodes" into a process that causes physical materialization. It turns 
into what I have called [an] EE unit, 1 in which case it is embarked upon 
its own kind of physical experience. 

These EE units also operate as fields, as waves, or as particles, as the 
units of consciousness do — but in your terms they are closer to physical 
orientation. Their die is cast, so to speak: They have already begun the 
special kind of screening process necessary that will bring about 
physical form. They begin to deal with the kinds of information that 
will help form your world. There are literally numberless steps taken 
before EE units combine in their own fashion to form the most 
microscopic physical particles, and even here the greatest, gentlest 
sorting-out process takes place as these units disentangle themselves at 
certain operational levels (underlined) from their own greater fields of 
"information," to specialize in the various elements that will allow for 
the production of atoms and molecules impeccably suited to your kind 
of world. 

(By now Jane was moving into a more subdued form of that rolling, 
resonant delivery for Seth that she'd used in the last session.) 

First, again, you have various stages of, say, pseudomatter, of 



Dreams, "Evolution,"' and Value Fulfillment 


177 


dream images, that only gradually — in those terms — coalesce and 
become physically viable, for there are endless varieties of "matter" 
between the matter that you recognize and the antimatter of physicists' 
theories. 

Form exists at many other levels than those you recognize, in other 
words. Your dream forms are quite as real as your physical ones. They 
simply fit into their own environment at another level of activity, and 
they are quite reminiscent of the kinds of forms that you had in the 
beginning of [your] world. 

While you and all of the other species were what I have called 
sleepwalkers, your bodies by then were physically capable. In a manner 
of speaking, you did not know how to use them properly as yet. Now, 
from a waking state, you do not understand how your dream bodies can 
seem to fly through the air, defy space and even time, converse with 
strangers and so forth. In the same way, however, once, you had to learn 
to deal with gravity, to deal with space and time, to manipulate in a 
world of objects, to simply breathe, to digest your food, and to perform 
all of the biological manipulations that now you take for granted (all 
most emphatically). 

You could not afford to identify too completely with such bodies 
until you learned how to survive within them, so in the dream state 
(pause) the true processes of life began as these new bodies and earth- 
tuned consciousnesses saw themselves mentally exercising all portions 
of the body. Behind all that was the brilliant comprehension and 
cooperation of all of the units of consciousness that go to compose the 
body, each adding its own information and specific knowledge to the 
overall bodily organizations, and each involved in the most intricate 
fields of relationships, for the miracle of the body's efficiency is the 
result of relationships that exist among all of its parts, connecting it to 
other levels of existence that do not physically appear. 

(9:48.) Units of consciousness (CU's), transforming themselves into 
EE units, formed the environment and all of its inhabitants in the same 
process, in what you might call a circular ma nn er rather than a serial 
one. And in those terms, of course, there are only various physical 
manifestations of consciousness, not a planet and its inhabitants, but an 
entire gestalt of awareized consciousness. In those terms (underlined), 
each portion of 



178 


Jane Roberts 


physically oriented consciousness sees reality and experience from its 
own privileged viewpoint, about which it seems all else revolves, even 
though this may involve a larger generalized held than your own, or a 
smaller one. 

So to rocks, say, you can be considered a portion of their 
environment, while you may consider them merely a portion of your 
environment. You simply do not tune into the range of rock 
consciousness. Actually (pause), many other kinds of consciousness, 
while focused in their own specific ways, are more aware than man is 
of earth's unified nature — but man, in following his own ways, also 
adds to the value fulfillment of all other consciousnesses in ways that 
are quite outside of usual systems of knowledge. 

If you remember that beneath all, each unit of consciousness is 
aware of the position of each other unit, and that these units form all 
physical matter, then perhaps you can intuitively follow what I mean, 
for whatever knowledge man attains, whatever experience any one 
person accumulates, whatever arts or sciences you produce, all such 
information is instantly perceived at other levels of activity by each of 
the other units of consciousness that compose physical reality — 
whether those units form the shape of a rock, a raindrop, an apple, a cat, 
a frog or a shoe. Manufactured products are also composed of atoms 
and molecules that ride upon units of consciousness transformed into 
EE units, and hence into physical elements. 

What you have, really, is a manifested and an unmanifested 
consciousness, but only relatively speaking. You do not perceive the 
consciousness of objects. It is not manifest to you because your range 
of activities requires boundaries to frame your picture of reality. 

All of your manufactured objects also originated in the realm of 
dreams, first obviously being conceived of mentally, and in the same 
way man produced his first tools. He was bom with (long pause) all of 
those abilities — abilities by which he is now characterized — and with 
other abilities that in your terms still wait for development. Not that he 
has not used them so far, but that he has not focused upon them in what 
you consider the main lines of civilized continuity. Hints of those 
abilities are always present in the dream state, and in the arts, in the 
religions, and even in the sciences. They appear in politics and 
business, 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


179 


but as the largely unmanifcst intuitive background, which is largely 
ignored. We will return to these later in the book. 

(10:12.) Man's dreams have always provided him with a sense of 
impetus, purpose, meaning, and given him the raw material from which 
to form his civilizations. The true history of the world is the history of 
man's dreams, for they have been responsible in one way or another for 
all historic developments. 

They were responsible for the birth of agriculture, as well as 
industry, the rise and fall of nations, the "glory" that was Rome, and 
Rome's destruction. (Pause.) Your present technological advances can 
almost be dated from the [invention of] the printing press, to Edison's 
inventions, which were flashes of intuition, dream-inspired. But if what 
I am telling you is true, then it is obvious that when I say that your 
physical world originated in the world of dreams, I must mean 
something far different from the usual definition of dream reality. 
Again, I could choose another term, but I want to emphasize each 
person's intimate contact with that other reality that does occur in what 
you think of as the state of dreaming (all very intently). 

That analogy will help you at least intuitively understand the 
existence of situations such as suffering, and poverty, that otherwise 
seem to have no adequate explanations (as Jane and I were discussing 
today). I hope also to account for behavior on the part of nature that 
certainly seems to imply the survival of the fittest in a tooth-and-claw 
fashion, or the punishing acts of a vengeful God on the one hand and 
the triumph of an evil force on the other. 

For now in our tale of beginnings, however, we still have a 
spasmodic universe that appears and disappears — that gradually, in 
those terms, manifests for longer periods of time. What you really had 
in the beginning were images without form, slowly adopting form, 
blinking on and off, then stabilizing into forms that were as yet not 
completely physical. These then took on all of the characteristics that 
you now consider formed physical matter. 

As all of this occurred, consciousness took on more and more 
specific orientations, greater organizations at your end. At the "other 
end," it disentangled itself from vaster fields of activity to allow for this 
specific behavior. All of these units of consciousness, again, operate as 
entities (or particles, or as waves or 



180 


Jane Roberts 


forces). In those terms, consciousness formed the experience of time — 
and not, of course, the other way around. (Quietly at 10:29:) End of 
dictation. A small note: (Seth came through with a couple of sentences 
for Jane. Then:) I bid you a fond good evening. And we will have a 
session on anything you want, at any time. ("Thank you, Seth. Good 
night. ") 

(10:31 p.m. Seth's last remark, which I took to be rather humorous, 
reflected one of the reasons for Jane's upset before the session: the conflict 
she feels between having just book sessions versus obtaining Seth material 
on at least a few of the other subjects we always have in mind. Currently 
these include topics like Jonestown, Iran, Frameworks 1 and 2 — and 
one I initialed earlier this year about human reproduction, called "the 
community of sperm. " In a couple of essays I discussed, and asked ques- 
tions about, the roles played by the 200 million to 500 million sperm that 
don't make contact with the female egg at the time of conception. I also 
wanted to know about the deep biological communication that must go 
on among all of the sperm in a man 's body at any given time, and why 
one of the "fittest" sperm in a particular ejaculate evidently doesn't al- 
ways fertilize the egg. Seth has given some answers in a couple of ses- 
sions, and we want more. Originally I'd planned to present excerpts here 
from our joint material — but I see now that I have no space in which to 
do so. 

Jane's delivery had turned out to be excellent this evening, her manner 
steady and with fewer pauses than she'd used in Monday night's session. 
Although she didn't reach the peaks of soaring eloquence she'd touched 
upon in that last session, elements of that state were present tonight.) 


MOTE. Session 890 

1. Seth's earliest material on EE (electromagnetic energy) units came 
through in September and October of 1967; in the Appendix of The 
Seth Material, see the excerpts Jane presented from sessions 504 
through 506. Then in Chapter 20 of Seth Speaks, see Session 581 for 
April 14, 1971. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


181 


SESSION 891— December 26, 1979 

9:07 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(No session was held last Monday evening, Christmas Eve. Instead, we 
had a few close friends in; all of us exchanged gifts. After the party was 
over Jane and I gave each other our own presents. My high point was 
receiving the little book of poems and sketches she'd made for me. [I 
hadn 't created anything like that for her, though.] When Jane read her 
poetry to me I strongly felt once again her innocence and perception: 
"The universe keeps turning into us. ...” We had a quiet but very 
enjoyable Christmas day. 

Tonight's session may not be formal book dictation, but it contains 
many connections to Dreams. 7 don't care whether we have a book 
session or one on something else, " Jane said as we sat for the session at 
8:50. "I'm just waiting. I don't even feel him around. ..." She thought 
this was strange, since during the last couple of days she'd picked up 
quite a few insights from Seth on various subjects. We'd discussed all of 
them, but without making any notes. 

At 9:06: "I guess I'm ready. It doesn't sound like the book, though. 
Sometimes I get a first line. . . .") 

(Softly, eyes dark and luminous:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

(With humor:) Tonight's subject matter: "Great Expectations" — for I 
am here referring to the book by (Charles) Dickens. 

Now: The year 1980 exists in all of its potential versions, now in this 
moment. Because mass events are concerned there is not a completely 
different year, of course, for each individual on the face of the planet — 
but there are literally an endless number of mass-shared worlds of 1980 
"in the wings," so to speak. 

It is not quite as simple a matter as just deciding what events you 
want to materialize as reality, since you have, in your terms, a body of 
probabilities of one kind or another already established as the raw 
materials for the coming year. It would be quite improbable for you, 
Joseph (as Seth calls me), to suddenly turn into a tailor, for example, 
for none of your choices with probabilities have led toward such an 
action. 

In like manner, England in all probability next year will not suddenly 
turn into a Mohammedan nation. But within the range 



182 


Jane Roberts 


of workable probabilities, private and mass choices, the people of the 
world are choosing their probable 1980s. 

(Long pause.) I am taking my time here, for there are some issues 
that I would like to clear up, that are difficult to explain. 

Any of the probable actions that a person considers are a part of that 
person's conscious thought. Just underneath, however, people also 
consider other sets of probabilities that may or may not reach conscious 
level, simply because they are shunted aside, or because they seem to 
meet with no conscious recognition. I want you to try and imagine 
actual events, as you think of them, to be (pause) the vitalized 
representations of probabilities — that is, as the physical versions of 
mental probabilities. The probabilities with which you are not 
consciously concerned remain psychologically peripheral: They are 
there but not there, so to speak. 

Your conscious mind can only accept a certain sequence of 
probabilities as recognized experience. As I have said, the choices 
among probabilities go on constantly, both on conscious and 
unconscious levels. Events that you do not perceive as conscious 
experience are (pause) a part of your unconscious experience, however, 
to some extent . This applies to the individual, and of course en masse 
the same applies to world events. Each action seeks all of its own 
possible fulfillments. All That Is seeks all possible experience, but in 
such a larger framework in this case that questions of, say, pain or death 
simply do not apply, though [certainly] they do on the physical level 
(all quite force-fully) . 

(9:25.) Great expectations, basically, have nothing to do with degree, 
for a grass blade is filled with great expectations. Great expectations are 
built upon a faith in the nature of reality, a faith in nature itself, a faith 
in the life you are given, whatever its degree — and all children, for 
example, are bom with those expectations. Fairy tales are indeed often 
— though not always — carriers of a kind of underground knowledge, as 
per your discussion about Cinderella (also see the 824th session for 
Mass Events), and the greatest fairy tales are always those in which the 
greatest expectations win out: The elements of the physical world that 
are unfortunate can be changed in the twinkling of an eye through great 
expectations. 

Your education tells you that all of that is nonsense, that the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


183 


world is defined by its physical aspects alone. When you thi nk of power 
you think of, say, nuclear energy, or solar energy — but power is the 
creative energy within men's minds that allows them to use such 
powers, such energies, such forces. 

The true power is in the imagination which dares to speculate upon 
that which is not yet (intently). The imagination, backed by great 
expectations, can bring about almost any reality within the range of 
probabilities. All of the possible versions of 1980 will happen. Except 
for those you settle upon, all of the others will remain psychologically 
peripheral, in the background of your conscious experience — but all of 
those possible versions will be connected in one way or another. 

The important lessons have never really appeared in your societies: 
the most beneficial use of the directed will, with great expectations, and 
that coupled with the knowledge of Framework 1 and 2 activities. Very 
simply: You want something, you dwell upon it consciously for a 
w'hile, you consciously imagine it coming to the forefront of 
probabilities, closer to your actuality. Then you drop it like a pebble 
into Framework 2, forget about it as much as possible for a fortnight, 
and do this in a certain rhythm. 

I gave you some New Year's resolutions last year, and it seems to me 
(with some irony) that they could be resurrected. 

("I read them several times a week, " I told Seth. Actually, he gave us 
his resolutions this year — on January l!) 

They are as good, tell Ruburt, who does not read them now, as they 
were then. They help focus both mind and imagination. That focusing 
helps you to act, to be. Now : give us a moment. . . . 

(9:37. Seth came through with two short paragraphs for fane. Then:) 

Now: In our book, I will be doing my best to explain the origin of 
your universe, and in such a way that most of the pertinent questions 
are answered, but man's present concept of reality is so limited that I 
must often resort to analogies. 

In the most basic of terms, as 1980 happens the energy that comes 
into your universe is as new 7 as if (in your terms) the world were 
created yesterday — a point that will be rather difficult to explain. All of 
the probable versions of 1980 spin off their own probable pasts as well 
as their own probable futures, and any consciousness that exists in 1980 
was (again in those terms) a part of what you think of as the beginning 
of the world. 



184 


Jane Roberts 


(To me.) Your mother did not simply choose to believe, in her old 
age, in a different past than the one that was accepted by the family — 
she effectively changed probabilities. She was not deluded or obsessed. 
Her memory in that regard, now, was not defective: It was the memory 
of the probable woman that she became. 2 

Like the entire American hostage affair (in Iran), any physical event 
serves as a focus that attracts all of its probable versions and outcomes. 
The hostage situation (now in day 53) is a materialized mass dream, 
meant to be important and vital on political and religious platforms of 
reality, meant to dramatize a conflict of beliefs, and to project that 
conflict outward into the realm of public knowledge. Everyone 
involved was consciously and unconsciously a willing participant at the 
most basic levels of human behavior, and it is of course no coincidence 
that 1980 is immediately foreshadowed by that event. What will the 
world do with it? 

Your TV and news systems of communication are a part of the event 
itself, of course. It is in a way far better that these events occurred now, 
and in the way that they have, so that the problems appear clearly in the 
world arena. They are actually thus of a far less violent nature than they 
might otherwise have been. 

Religious beliefs will be examined as they have not been before, and 
their connections and political affiliations. The Arab world still needs 
the West, and again, it is better that those issues come to light now, 
while they must to some extent consider the rest of the world. 

Do not personally give any more conscious consideration, either of 
you, to events that you do not want to happen. (Long pause.) Any such 
concentration, to whatever degree, ties you in with those probabilities, 
so concentrate upon what you want, and as far as public events are 
concerned, take it for granted that sometimes even men are wiser than 
they know. 

Do you have questions? 

(Only a million of them, I thought. "No, I guess not, " I said to Seth.) 

Then I wish you a happy anniversary — 

("Thank you. ") 

— and the most auspicious of 1980's. A fond good evening. 

("Thank you, Seth. Good night. ") 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


185 


(9:58 p.m. Jane and I celebrate our 25th wedding anniversary tomor- 
row.) 


NOTES. Session 891 

1. I referred to Seth's resolutions at the end of the 889th ses 
sion. I think they're very effective; I try to keep them constantly 
in mind: 

" One : I will approve of myself, my characteristics, my abilities, my 
likes and dislikes, my inclinations and disinclinations, realizing that 
these form my unique individuality. They are given me for a reason. 

" Two : I will approve of and rejoice in my accomplishments, and I 
will be as vigorous in listing these — as ri gorous in remembering them 
— as I have ever been in remembering and enumerating my failures or 
lacks of accomplishment. 

"Three: I will remember the creative framework of existence, in 
which I have my being. Therefore the possibilities, potentials, seeming 
miracles, and joyful spontaneity of Framework 2 will be in my mind, 
so that the doors to creative living are open. 

"Four: I will realize that the future is a probability. In terms of 
ordinary experience, nothing exists there yet. It is virgin territory, 
planted by my feelings and thoughts in the present. Therefore I will 
plant accomplishments and successes, and I will do this by 
remembering that nothing can exist in the future that I do not want to 
be there ." 

2. Here Seth referred to the striking way in which my mother, 
Stella Butts, had recreated for the better her "memories" of her 
husband (my father). Robert Butts, Sr., died in February 1971, 
34 months before she did. All of the members of the Butts 
family observed the pronounced changes in Stella's thinking 
about her husband, although Jane and I were the only ones who 
ascribed those changes to her moving into another probable 
reality. 



186 


Jane Roberts 


SESSION 892— January 2, 1980 

8:47 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(On December 27, the night of our anniversary, Jane held an unplanned 
session for young married friends of ours. Although she seldom does this 
anymore because of the work load involved, such spontaneous expressions 
of her creativity help my wife as well as the others involved. I taped the 
session on the recorder I'd given Jane for Christmas; our friends are to 
send us a transcript of the tape. 

Seth didn't come through last Monday evening, New Year's Eve. 
Instead, Jane and I gave a party for a change. The next day we were 
ready to get back to our writing and painting, but first I cleared the 
house of holiday paraphernalia — including our beautiful Christmas 
tree. I carefully propped up the tree, a balsam fir, in the woods at the 
back of the hill house. I told myself that next summer the tree's skeleton 
would remind me of the days that had passed since 1980 began, in our 
terms; I knew I'd be grateful for having physically experienced every one 
of them. [And as an artist, I'd be as much intrigued by the tree's naked 
structure as I had been when it bore its dense greenery. ] 

Over the weekend we'd signed the contracts with our publisher, Pren- 
tice-Hall, for Mass Events and God of Jane, and I mailed them this 
morning. We're progressing well on both projects. In their unique ways, 
I told Jane, my notes for Mass Events are the most challenging writing 
I've done. We're getting up at 6:00 again, so that we can get in a good 
morning's "work" before lunchtime.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Happy New Year. 

("Thank you. The same to you, " I said, knowing that Seth 's under- 
standing of "time" was certainly much different than ours.) 

Dictation. You were (pause) each present at the beginning of the 
world, then, though you may be present in the world now in a 
somewhat different fashion. 

Remember that each unit of consciousness is a fragment of All That 
Is, a divine portion. Then perhaps what I am about to explain will make 
more sense. 

For some time, in your terms, the sleepwalkers remained more or 
less at that level of activity, and for many centuries they used the 
surface of the earth as a kind of background for other activ- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


187 


ity. Their real life was what you would now call the dreaming one. They 
worked mentally while asleep, constructing in their individual minds 
and in their joint mental endeavors (long pause) all of the dazzling 
images that would later become a mental reservoir from which men 
could draw. In that multidimensional array, consciousness mentally 
learned to form itself into EE units, atoms and molecules, electrons and 
chromosomes. It mentally formed the patterns through which all 
physical life could flow. The world then came into physical existence. 
Those units of consciousness are indestructible and vitalized, regardless 
of the forms they take, and while men's forms were dream images, 
consciousness spun forms into physical material. 

Consciousness possesses the most unimaginable agility without ever 
losing any potency. Those units of consciousness, for example, can mix 
and combine with others to form a million different sequences of 
memory and desire, of neural achievement and recognition, [of] 
structure and design. 

You read your own consciousness now in a kind of vertical fashion, 
identifying only with certain portions of it, and it seems to you that any 
other organization of perception, any other recognition of identity, 
would quite necessarily negate your own or render it inoperable. In the 
beginning of the world there were numberless groupings, however, and 
affiliations of consciousness, many other organizations of identity that 
were recognized, as well as the kind of psychological orientation you 
have now — but [your] kind of orientation was not the paramount one. 
While, generally speaking, earth's species existed from the beginning in 
the forms by which you now know 1 them, consciousness of species was 
quite different, and all species were much more intimately related 
through various kinds of identification that have since gone into the 
underground of awareness. 

(9:05.) Initially, then, the world was a dream, and what you think of 
as waking consciousness was the dreaming consciousness. In that 
regard the earth's entire environment was built mentally, atom by 
conscious atom — each atom, again, being initially formed by units of 
consciousness. I said that these units could operate as entities, and as 
forces, so we are not speaking of a mental mechanics but of entities in 
the true meaning of the word: entities of unimaginable creative and 
psychic properties, purposeful fragments propelled from the infinite 
mind as that 



188 


Jane Roberts 


mind was filled with the inspiration that gave light to the world. Those 
entities, in your terms so ancient, left fragments of themselves in trance 
(underlined), so to speak, that form the rocks and hills, the mountains, 
the air and the water, and all of the elements that exist on the face of 
the earth. 

(A one-minute pause at 9:13.) Those entities are in trance, in those 
terms, but their potency is not diminished, and there is constant 
communication among them always. 

(Long pause.) There is also constant communication between them 
and you at other levels than those you recognize, so that there is an 
unending interplay between each species and its environment. 

(Long pause.) There is no place where consciousness stops and the 
environment begins, or vice versa. Each form of life is created along 
with each other form — environment and organism in those terms 
creating each other. After forms were fully physical, however, all 
species operated as sleepwalkers for many centuries, though on the 
scale that existed then the passage of time was not considered in the 
same fashion. During that period the work of wedding nonphysical 
consciousness to matter was accomplished. Effects of gravity, for 
example, were stabilized. The seasons took on the rhythms best suited 
to the creatures in various locations. The environment and the creatures 
accommodated each other. 

Up until then, the main communications had followed the 
characteristic patterns of units of consciousness (long pause), each unit 
knowing its relationship to all others upon the planet. Creatures relied 
upon inner senses while learning to operate the new, highly specific 
physical ones that pinpointed perception in time and place. This 
pinpointing of perception was of vital importance, for with the full 
arousal of consciousness in flesh, intersections with space and time 
[had to be] impeccable. 

Dream bodies became physical, and through the use of the senses 
tuned . to physical frequencies — frequencies of such power and allure 
that they would reach all creatures of every kind, from microbe to 
elephant, holding them together in a cohesive web of space-and-time 
alignment. 

In the beginning, man's dreams were in certain terms of immediate 
physical survival. They gave man information — a kind that of necessity 
the new physical senses could not contain. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


189 


Those senses could only perceive the immediate environment, but 
man's dreams compensated for that lack, and filled out his 
consciousness by giving it the benefit of that larger generalized 
information to which it had once had an easy access. When he was 
asleep man could take advantage of the information hank s contained in 
the units of consciousness that composed his very flesh. 

(9:30.) Now (underlined): When he dreamed — when he dreamed 
(underlined) — man actually returned to a state prior to waking, from 
which his physical life itself had emerged — only now he was a new 
creature, a new kind of consciousness, and so were all of the other 
species. In dreams all of the species familiarized themselves with their 
old affiliations, and they read their own identities in different fashions. 
"They remembered how it was." They remembered that they formed 
each other. 

This tale, I admit, is far more difficult to understand than a simple 
story of God's creation of the world, or its actual production in a 
meaningless universe through the slippery hands of chance — and yet 
my story is more magnificent because elements of its truth will find 
resonance in the minds and hearts of those open enough to listen. For 
men's minds themselves are alive with the desire to read properly, and 
they are aware of their own vast heritage. It is not simply that man has 
a soul that is somehow blessed while the rest of him is not, but that in 
those terms everything [he knows], regardless of size or degree, is 
made of "soul stuff." Each portion has its own identity and validity — 
and no portion is ever annihilated or destroyed. The form may change. 

(All with a rolling intensity:) I must of necessity tell this story in 
serial terms, but the world and all of its creatures actually come 
together like some spontaneously composed, ever-playing musical 
composition in which the notes themselves are alive and play 
themselves, so that the musicians and the notes are one and the same, 
the purpose and the performance being one, with each note played 
continuing to strike all of its own probable versions, forming all of its 
own probable compositions while at the same time taking part in all of 
the themes, melodies, and notes of the other compositions — so that 
each note, striking, defines itself, and yet also exists by virtue of its 
position in the composition as a whole. 



190 


Jane Roberts 


The conscious mind ca nn ot handle that kind of multidimensional 
creativity, yet it can expand into a kind of new recognition when it is 
carried along, still being itself, by its own theme. 

In a way, your world follows its own theme in creativity's com- 
position. You want to know where you came into the musical 
production, so to speak. (Pause.) I use a musical analogy here, if a 
simple one, to point out that we are also dealing with frequencies of 
perception. You are tuned into earth's orchestration [you might say], and 
your perception of time is simply the result of habits — habits of 
perception that you had to learn in the beginning of the world. And you 
learned those habits as your physical senses gradually became more 
alert and specific. 

(9:47.) You "timed" yourselves — but greater perceptions always 
appeared in the background of your consciousnesses and in the dream 
state. It is the great activity of the dream state that allows you, as 
psychological and physical creatures, to recognize and inhabit the 
world that you know (louder). 

End of dictation. 

You did an excellent job of your own dream interpretation, and 
Ruburt unwittingly added to it with his poetry. 1 

Do you have any questions? 

("Have you got anything to say for the beginning of the year, like you 
did with your resolutions for the start of last year?" 

(With considerable humor, staring at me:) I thought I gave you my 
1980 speech last time. 

("Okay.") 

Continue with the resolutions. I expect that sessions like this 
evening's will themselves help you understand the nature of 
Frameworks 1 and 2, and the importance of your mental activity in 
bringing about physical events. 

("I was thinking about that. ") 

I bid you a fond good evening. 

("Thank you, Seth. Goodnight.") 

(9:52 p.m. Jane said she'd been pretty far out during the session — 
then added later while we talked that she was picking up from Seth 
information on the beginning of our own world, species and civilizations 
that he intended to give in the next session. Seth, then, was capable of 
coming through with that material right now. Only Jane's and my own 
conventions of time and habit, even concerning a phenomenon as un- 
usual as the sessions, stopped him from doing so. Inevitably, the session 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


191 


Jane delivers for Seth next Monday evening will be somewhat different 
from the one she could produce tonight. There are many interesting 
implications here.) 


NOTE. Session 892 

1. My dream represented a reaffirmation of a stand I'd taken early in 
this life — one that perhaps I'd felt since birth. Very simply: I dreamed 
that I was a youth, and that even though there was snow on the ground 
I'd been given the task of taking care of a beautiful young tree growing 
in a large field next to the Butts family home in Sayre, Pennsylvania. 
(Sayre is only 1 8 miles from Elmira, New York, where Jane and I live 
now.) Even though it was wintertime, the tree carried a sparse cover of 
leaves. Nearby in the dream were old industrial buildings, in which I 
became lost — but I found my way out of them and returned to the tree. 
My interpretation is that I saw the tree as the tree of life even then, and 
that I'd chosen to remain close to the world of nature and art instead of 
immersing myself in the safer industrial one. Jane was inspired by the 
dream to write a series of excellent short poems about it today. 



CHAPTER 


4 


The Ancient Dreamers 


SESSION 893— January 7, 1980 

8:43 p.m. MONDAY 

(Jane called me early for the session, just to make sure she had one before 
she became too relaxed. She's been planning on going back to taking 
breaks between deliveries, so that she can hold longer sessions. By 8:40 
she could feel Seth around. "As I say, I'll do the best I can. . . .") 

(With a surprising heartiness:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Dictation, to begin: New chapter (four): "The Ancient Dreamers." 

Give us a moment. . . . For what would seem to you to be eons, 
according to your time scale, men were in the dreaming state far more 
than they were in the waking one. They slept long hours, as did the 
animals — awakening, so to speak, to exercise their bodies, obtain 
sustenance, and, later, to mate. It was indeed a dreamlike w;orld, but a 
highly charming and vital one, in which dreaming imaginations played 
rambunctiously with all the probabilities entailed in this new venture: 
imagining the various forms of language and communication possible, 
spinning great dream tales of future civilizations replete with their own 
built-in histories — building, because they were now allied with time, 
mental edifices that automatically created pasts as well as futures. 192 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


193 


These ancient dreams were shared to some extent by each 
consciousness that was embarked upon the earthly venture, so that 
creatures and environment together formed great environmental 
realities. Valleys and mountains, and their inhabitants, together 
dreamed themselves into being and coexistence. 

The species — from your viewpoint (underlined) — lived at a much 
slower pace in those terms. The blood, for example, did not need to 
course so quickly through the veins [and arteries], the heart did not 
need to beat as fast. And in an important fashion the coordination of the 
creature in its environment did not need to be as precise, since there 
was an elastic give-and-take of consciousness between the two. 

In ways almost impossible to describe, the ground rules were not as 
yet firmly established. Gravity itself did not carry its all-pervasive 
sway, so that the air was more buoyant. Man was aware of its support in 
a luxurious, intimate fashion. He was aware of himself in a different 
way, so that, for example, his identification with the self did not stop 
where his skin stopped: He could follow it outward into the space about 
his form, and feel it merge with the atmosphere with a primal sense- 
experience that you have forgotten. 

(8:58.) During this period, incidentally, mental activity of the 
highest, most original variety was the strongest dream characteristic, 
and the knowledge [man] gained was imprinted upon the physical 
brain: what is now completely unconscious activity involving the 
functions of the body, its relationship with the environment, its balance 
and temperature, its constant inner alterations. All of these highly 
intricate activities were learned and practiced in the dream state as the 
CU's translated their inner knowledge through the state of dreaming 
into the physical form. 

Then in your terms man began, with the other species, to waken 
more fully into the physical world, to develop the exterior senses, to 
intersect delicately and precisely with space and time. Yet man still 
sleeps and dreams, and that state is still a firm connective with his own 
origins, and with the origins of the universe as he knows it as well. 

(Pause in a steady, if usually rather subdued, delivery.) 

Man dreamed his languages. He dreamed how to use his tongue to 
form the words. In his dreams he practiced stringing 



194 


Jane Roberts 


the words together to form their meanings, so that finally he could 
consciously begin a sentence without actually knowing how it was 
begun, yet in the faith that he could and would complete it. 

All languages have as their basis the language that was spoken in 
dreams. The need for language arose, however, as man became less a 
dreamer and more immersed in the specifics of space and time, for in 
the dream state his communications with his fellows and other species 
was instantaneous. Language arose to take the place of' that inner 
communication, then. There is a great underlying unity in all of man's 
so-called early cultures — cave drawings and religions — because they 
were all fed by that common source, as man tried to transpose inner 
knowledge into physical actuality. 

The body learned to maintain its stability, its strength and agility, to 
achieve a state of balance in complementary response to the weather 
and elements, to dream computations that the conscious mind alone 
could not hold. The body learned to heal itself in sleep in its dreams — 
and at certain levels in that state even now each portion of 
consciousness contributes to the health and stability of all other 
portions. Far from the claw-and-dagger universe, you have one whose 
very foundation is based upon the loving cooperation of all of its parts. 
That is given — the gift of life brings along with it the actualization of 
that cooperation, for the body's parts exist as a unit because of inner 
relationships of a cooperative nature; and those exist at your birth (most 
emphatically), when you are innocent of any cultural beliefs that may 
be to the contrary. 

(9:14.) If it were not for this most basic, initial loving cooperation, 
that is a given quality in life itself, life would not have continued. Each 
individual of each species takes that initial zest and joy of life as its 
own yardstick. Each individual of whatever species, and each 
consciousness, whatever its degree, automatically seeks to enhance the 
quality of life itself — not only for itself but for all of reality as well. 

This is a given characteristic of life, regardless of the beliefs that 
may lead you to misinterpret the actions of nature, casting some of its 
creatures in a reprehensible light. 

(Pause.) In a fashion those ancient dreamers, through their immense 
creativity, dreamed all of life's creatures in all of their pasts, presents, 
and futures — that is, their dreams opened up 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


195 


the doors of space and time to entities that otherwise would not have 
been released into actualization, even as, for example, the units of 
consciousness were once released from the mind of All That Is. 

All possible entities that can ever be actualized always exist. They 
[have] always existed and they always will exist. All That Is must, by 
its characteristics, be all that it can ever be, and so there can be no end 
to existence — and, in those terms, no beginning. But in terms of your 
world the units of consciousness, acting both as forces and as 
psychological entities of massive power, planted the seeds of your 
world in a dimension of imaginative power that gave birth to physical 
form. In your terms those entities are your ancestors — and yet [they 
are] not yours alone, but the ancestors of all the consciousnesses that 
make up your world. 

Take your break. 

(9:25. And for the first time in a long while, Jane did take a break 
during a session. "You did well, " I told her. 

"Yes, I was really going to town. " Even though her delivery had been 
on the quiet side, still at times Seth had come through with considerable 
power. "In the winter I like to start sessions earlier, "Jane said, "so I can 
finish sooner and watch TV for half an hour — it's relaxing and cozy, 
especially when we're alone. ... I think the rest of the session will be 
about me. " 

She was right. Beginning at 9:34, Seth returned with a good amount 
of material for her, ' then ended the session at 9:58 p.m.) 


NOTE. Session 893 

1 . It's very interesting to see how Seth's information for Jane grew out 
of his work on Dreams tonight. For the most part, I'm presenting only 
the beginning of the several pages of notes I took from him — just 
enough to show how even his more personal material can fly in the face 
of convention (to coin a phrase!): 

"Now: It is easy to live — so easy that although you live, rest, create, 
respond, feel, touch, see, sleep, and wake, you do not really have to try 
to do any of those things. From your viewpoint they are done for you. 

"They are done for you in Framework 2 — and fUrther dis- 



196 


Jane Roberts 


cussions of Framework 2, incidentally, will be interwound throughout 
our present book. Your beliefs often tell you that life is hard, however, 
that living is difficult, that the universe, again, is unsafe, and that you 
must use all of your resources — not to meet [life] with anything like 
joyful abandon, of course, but to protect yourself against its implied 
threats; threats that you have been taught to expect. 

"But your beliefs do not stop there. Because of' both scientific and 
religious ones, in Western civilization you believe that there are threats 
from within also. As a result you forget your natural selves, and become 
involved in a secondary, largely imaginary culture: beliefs that are 
projected negatively into the future, individually and en masse. People 
respond with illnesses of one kind or another, or through exaggerated 
[behavior], 

"Living is easy (underlined). It is safe and reliable because it is easy. 
This is for Ruburt's benefit. ..." 

And later, with much humor: " 1 am willing to have longer sessions 
for as long as you put up with me. I will work on one book one night 
and another one the next, if you prefer, or discuss private material or 
other questions of a general nature, or work twice a week on our 
present material — whatever suits your fine fancies." 

("Well, for someone who wasn't with it too much, I did okay, " Jane 
said when the session was over. She was rejuvenated to a degree. Both oj 
us were impressed anew by Seth's present and potential creativity. "If it 
weren't for all that mail we get, I'd try at least three sessions a week, " she 
added. "But you don't have the time to type any more, with all you're 
doing now. " 

"I'd make the time. It would be worth it. " And I reminded Jane that 
back in the days of her ESP classes, she'd often given three sessions a 
week. We held the last class in February 1975, as we prepared to move 
to the hill house from our downtown apartments.) 


SESSION 894— January 9, 1980 

9:08 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(The weather continues to be unseasonably warm for this time of year, 
with the ground still bare. We've had very little snow this winter. It's 
hard to believe. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


197 


Jane felt tired and harried as we sat for the session at about 8:50. 
She'd just finished reading the last 25 of the 48 fan letters that had 
arrived from our publisher this noon; she'd wanted a little time to relax 
and write a few notes before the session. However, that pile of letters 
means that people are reading our books, and for that we're grateful 
indeed. Over the holidays we received more Christmas cards from readers 
than ever before; in fact, the greetings are still coming in. "I really get 
pooped, going over the mail, " Jane said, "but some of them are great 
letters. " She's answering most of the mail herself these days, since I don't 
have the time to help her.) 

Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

(With many pauses to start:) Dictation: During this period that we 
have labeled as belonging to the dreamers, certain subjective actions 
took place as the "structure" of earthly tuned consciousness formed the 
phenomena of "the self." 

What was needed was a highly focused, precisely tuned physical self 
that could operate efficiently in a space and time scheme that was being 
formed along with physical creatures — a self, however, that in one way 
or another must be supported by realms of information and knowledge 
of a kind that was basically independent of time and space. A 
knowledge indispensable, and yet a knowledge that could not be 
allowed to distract the physical focus. 

(Long pause.) In one way or another, that inner information had to 
connect each consciousness on the face of the planet. Earthly creatures 
must be able to react in a moment, yet the inner mechanisms that made 
such reactions possible were based upon calculations that could not be 
consciously kept in mind. In your time scheme, for example, you could 
never move as quickly as you do if you had to consciously work all the 
muscles involved in motion — or in speech, or in any such bodily 
performance. You certainly could not communicate on such a physical 
level if you first had to be aware of all of speech's mechanisms, 
working them consciously before a word was uttered. Yet you had to 
have that kind of knowledge, and you had to have it in a way that did 
not intrude upon your conscious thoughts. 

Basically there are no real divisions to the self, but for the sake of 
explanation we must speak of them in those terms. First of all you had 
the inner self, the creative dreaming self — composed, again, of units of 
consciousness, awarei/.cd energy that forms 



198 


Jane Roberts 


your identity, and that formed the identities of the earliest earth 
inhabitants. These inner selves formed their own dream bodies about 
them, as previously explained, but the dream bodies did not have to 
have physical reactions. They were free of gravity and space, and of 
time. 

(Pause at 9:23.) As the body became physical, however, the inner 
self formed the body consciousness so that the physical body became 
more aware of itself, of the environment, and of its relationship within 
the environment. Before this could happen, though, the body 
consciousness was taught to become aware of its own inner 
environment. The body was lovingly formed from EE units through all 
the stages to atoms, cells, organs, and so forth. The body's pattern came 
from the inner self, as all of the units of consciousness involved in this 
venture together formed this fabric of environment and creatures, each 
suited to the other. 

So far in our discussion, then, we have an inner self, dwelling 
primarily in a mental or psychic dimension, dreaming itself into 
physical form, and finally forming a body consciousness. To that body 
consciousness the inner self gives "its own body of physical 
knowledge," the vast reservoir of physical achievement that it has 
triumphantly produced. (Pause.) The body consciousness is not 
"unconscious," but for working purposes in your terms, [the body] 
possesses its own system of consciousness that to some extent, now 
(underlined), is separated from what you think of as your own normal 
consciousness. The body's consciousness is hardly to be considered less 
than your own, or as inferior to that of your inner self, since it 
represents knowledge from the inner self, and is a part of the inner seifs 
own consciousness — the part delegated to the body. 

[Each] cell, then, as I have often said, operates so well in time 
because it is, in those terms, precognitive. It is aware of the position, 
health, vitality, of all other cells on the face of the planet. It is. aware of 
the position of each grain of sand on the shores of each ocean, and in 
those terms it forms a portion of the earth's consciousness. 

At that level environment, creatures, and the elements of the natural 
world are all united — a point we will return to quite often. Your 
intellect as you think of it operates so clearly and precisely, so logically 
(with amusement), sometimes so arrogantly. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


199 


because the intellect rides that great thrust of codified, "ancient," 
"unconscious" power — the power of instant knowing that is a 
characteristic of the body consciousness (all very intently). 

(Pause, one of many in here.) Thus far in our discussion, we still 
have only an inner self and a body consciousness. As the body 
consciousness developed itself, perfected its organization, the inner self 
and the body consciousness together performed a kind of psychological 
double-entendre. 

(Pause at 9:42.) Give us a moment. . . . The best analogy I can think 
of is that up to that time the self was like a psychological rubber band, 
snapping inward and outward with great force and vitality, but without 
any kind of rigid-enough psychological framework to maintain a 
physical stance . The inner self still related to dream reality, while the 
body's orientation and the body consciousness attained, as was 
intended, a great sense of physical adventure, curiosity, speculation, 
wonder — and so once again the inner self put a portion of its 
consciousness in a different parcel, so to speak. As once it had formed 
the body consciousness, now it formed a physically attuned 
consciousness, a self whose desires and intents would be oriented in a 
way that, alone, the inner self could not be. 

(All with emphatic rhythm:) The inner self was too aware of its own 
multidimensionality, so in your terms it gave psychological birth to 
itself through the body in space and time. It knew itself as a physical 
creature. That portion of the self is the portion you recognize as your 
usual conscious self, alive within the scheme of seasons, aware within 
the designs of time, caught transfixed in moments of brilliant 
awareness, with civilizations that seem to come and go. That is the self 
that is alert in the dear preciseness of the moments, whose physical 
senses are bound to light and darkness, sound and touch. That is the self 
that lives the life of the body. 

It is the self that looks outward. It is the self that you call 
egotistically aware. The inner self became what I refer to as the inner 
ego. It looks into that inner reality, that psychic dimension of awareness 
from which both your own consciousness and your body consciousness 
emerged. 

You are one self, then, but for operating purposes we will say that 
you have three parts: the inner self or inner ego, the body 
consciousness, and the consciousness that you know. 



200 


Jane Roberts 


These portions, however, are intimately connected. They are like 
three different systems of consciousness operating together to form the 
whole. The divisions — the seeming divisions — are not stationary, but 
change constantly. 

(Long pause at 9:57.) Give us a moment. ... To one extent or 
another, these three systems of consciousness operate in one way or 
another in all of the species, and in all particles, in the physical 
universe. In your terms, this means that the proportions of the three 
systems might vary, but they are always in operation, whether we are 
speaking of a man or a woman, a rock or a fly, a star or an atom. The 
inner self represents your prime identity, the self you really are. 

(Very rapidly:) "Earth is a nice place, but I wouldn't want to live 
there." A twist on an old quote, I believe — but the fact is, you are 
physical creatures because you do like to live on earth, you do like the 
conditions, you do enjoy overall the particular kind of challenge and 
the particular kind of perception, knowledge and understanding that the 
earthly environment provides. 

(All very intently:) That environment, in your terms, certainly 
includes suffering. If joy has always been one of the characteristics of 
earth experience, so has suffering, and the subject will be covered in 
this book. Here, however, I only want to mention one facet, and that is 
the importance of physical sensation, of whatever kind — for the life of 
the body provides you, among all things, with a life of sensation, of 
feeling, a spectrum that must include the experience of all possible 
sensations within its overall range. 

Now as you will see, all creatures, regardless of their degree, can and 
do choose, within their spheres of reality, those sensations that they will 
experience — but to one extent or another (underlined! all, sensations 
are felt. We will later discuss the part of the mind and its interpretation, 
for example, of painful stimuli, but I want to make the point that those 
attracted to physical life are first and foremost tasters of sensation. 
Outside of that, basically, there are all kinds of mental distinctions 
made [among] stimuli. The body is made to react. It is made to feel life 
and vitality by reacting to an environment that is not itself, by en- 
countering what you might call natural stress. The body maintains its 
equilibrium by reacting against gravity, by coming in contact with other 
bodies, by changing its own sensations, by glorifying in the balance 
between balance and off-balance. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


201 


(Long pause at 10:14, then slowly:) Give us a moment. . . . The body 
consciousness is therefore given a&gt; superb sense of its own reality, a 
sureness of identity, a sense of innate safety and security, that allows it 
to not only function but to grow in the physical world. It is endowed 
with a sense of boldness, daring, a sense of natural power. It is perfectly 
formed to fit into its environment — and the environment is perfectly 
formed to have such creatures. 

The entities, or units of consciousness — those ancient fragments that 
burst into objectivity from the vast and infinite psychological realms of 
All That Is — dared all, for they joyfully abandoned themselves in space 
and time. They created new psychological entities, opened up an area 
of divine creativity that "until then" had been closed, and therefore to 
that [degree] extended the experience and immense existence of All 
That Is. For in so abandoning themselves they were not of course aban- 
doned, since they contained within themselves their inherent 
relationship with All That Is. In those terms All That Is became physical 
also, aroused at its divine depth by the thrusting of each grass blade 
through the soil into the air, aroused by each birth and by each moment 
of each creature's existence. 

All That Is, therefore, is immersed within your world, present in each 
hypothetical point, and forms the very fabric from which each portion 
of matter is created. 

That will do it. 

(10:25.) Now: My cheers to Ruburt. He is making good psy- 
chological progress, which means that he is making physical progress 
as well. 

A smaller point I thought I would throw in: My energy is often with 
you both in ways that you do not expect. End of session, and a fond 
good evening. 

("Good night, Seth. ") 

(10:26 p.m. "Jesus, I was so exhausted before the session, but I really 
had the feeling that we were getting some good stuff Jane said as soon 
as she was out of trance. She hadn't taken a break during the session, 
either. "I really enjoy getting up early, because no matter what else 
happens I know we've got a good morning's work in. ..." 

By "what else," Jane referred to a call she'd received today: Three 
young members of the ESP class we'd disbanded almost five years ago 
are in town from New York City, visiting a local friend from the old 
class. All four are dear friends of ours too, of course, and want to see us. 



202 


Jane Roberts 


First, though, they're to visit still another member from class who lives in 
a nearby town: He has tapes of some early class sessions that Jane had 
forgotten about; copies of the tapes will be made. "The kids" from the city 
are to call tomorrow, to learn if Jane will see them. [They did, and she 
did, for an hour after lunch.]) 


SESSION 895— January 14, 1980 

9:17 p.m. MONDAY 

(Our friend, David Yoder [I'll call him], is 48 years old. He's a bachelor, 
and a high-school teacher. Jane and I met him in May 1960, when we 
moved from Sayre into an apartment house close to downtown Elmira. 
The house had once been a luxurious private home. Jane began the 
sessions there three years later; indeed, we were to stay there for 15 years. 
At first David lived across the hall from us on the second floor. Even- 
tually he moved downstairs when a larger apartment right beneath ours 
became available: Still later, Jane and I rented the apartment he'd had 
on the second floor, so that we ended up with two apartments, side by 
side; we needed more room by then, and didn't want to move. 

David is one of the kindest people we've ever known. Jane initiated 
her ESP classes late in 1967 — so each Tuesday night for the next seven 
and a half years, our friend put up with a vast amount of shouting and 
banging over his head. He knew what Jane was up to, but had only a 
peripheral interest in "psychic phenomena. " David never complained 
about the racket, though sometimes he secluded himself in a back room 
down there, or left the house until class was over. It seemed that we were 
always apologizing for bothering him. 

David let Jane use his telephone to call our publisher when we couldn't 
afford a phone ourselves. He gave us his magazines and newspapers — 
a practice he continues to this day during his school year. Sometimes we 
swapped furniture with him; sometimes he sold us at very reasonable cost 
pieces he'd replaced. He has a passion for neatness and the well-ordered 
life. He bought a power-driven lawn mower, and for years cut the grass 
without asking our landlord for any compensation. 

In March 1975 Jane and I purchased the hill house just outside 
Elmira, and within a few weeks David acquired his own place not far 
from us in the valley below. We didn't see each other as often as we used 
to, but one morning each week, on his way to school, David left his 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


203 


magazines and newspapers at our hack porch door, whether or not we 
were up, or saw him. 

During the last couple of weeks David hadn't made his regular trips 
up the hill, but Jane and I were so busy that that fact nearly escaped us. 
Last Thursday morning, then, we were really shocked when Doris, who 
is also a teacher and a friend from those apartment-house years, called 
to tell us that David was in the hospital — that he was to undergo triple- 
bypass heart surgery the next day. Jane and I couldn't believe it. We'd 
thought David was in excellent health. He'd taken up jogging some time 
ago and was now running 15 miles at a time, three days a week. As he 
lay in the hospital, David asked Doris why this was happening to him, 
when he'd tried to take care of himself help others, and "do everything 
right. " 

Each time someone we know gets in serious trouble, Jane and I start 
questioning anew our own values, and those of the society we live in, for 
such challenges seem to come unbidden and unwanted from way out in 
some Jar comer of each person 's reality. We also had in mind another 
friend who'd died of cancer last year at the age of 39. 

David is recovering well from his surgery now, but cannot have visi- 
tors yet. Jane has called the hospital each day to ask about him; she's 
putting together for him a unique, evocative little book of poetry and 
paintings. I'm running errands for David, and eventually will be taking 
him home from the hospital. 

Seth talked about illness and suffering in general this evening, and 
about David in particular. I'm presenting excerpts from the generalized 
part of his material, but none about David himself. We have no idea of 
pressing Seth's personal information upon David; doing that would be 
an invasion of his privacy. Tonight's material, however, adds to our 
understanding of subjects like free will and choosing, good and evil, 
sickness and health, and reflects upon many questions people have asked 
us over the years. 

"Well, " Jane said as we sat for the session, "I'd almost rather feel that 
you were the victim of blind chance or accident, rather than that you get 
sick because of your own dumb ignorance or choice. ..." When I re- 
marked that I tried not to worry about such things anymore, she replied 
that she too had better get back to book work and forget the world's 
troubles: "Come on, Seth, I'm here. " But even as she felt him around, 
she knew that Seth wouldn't be giving book dictation per se.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

(Whispering as a joke in return: "Good evening, Seth. ") 



204 


Jane Roberts 


For many centuries (pause) the structure of the Roman Catholic 
church held [Western] civilization together, and gave it its meanings 
and its precepts. Those meanings and precepts flowed through the 
entire society, and served as the basis for all of the established modes of 
knowledge, commerce, medicine, science, and so forth. 

The church's view of reality was the accepted one. I cannot stress too 
thoroughly the fact that the beliefs of those times structured individual 
human living, so that the most private events of personal lives were 
interpreted to mean thus and so, as were of course the events of nations, 
plants, and animals. The world's view was a religious one, specified by 
the church, and its word was truth and fact at the same time. 

Illness was suffered, was sent by God to purge the soul, to cleanse 
the body, to punish the sinner, or simply to teach man his place by 
keeping him from the sins of pride. Suffering sent by God was 
considered a fact of life, then, and a religious truth as well. 

(Long pause at 9:25.) Some other civilizations have believed that 
illness was sent by demons or evil spirits, and that the world was full of 
good and bad spirits, invisible, intermixed with the elements of nature 
itself, and that man had to walk a careful line lest he upset the more 
dangerous or mischievous of those entities. In man's history there have 
been all kinds of incantations, meant to mollify the evil spirits that man 
believed were real in fact and in religious truth. 

It is easy enough to look at those belief structures and shrug your 
shoulders, wondering at man's distorted views of reality. The entire 
scientific view of illness, however, is quite as distorted (with amused 
emphasis). It is as laboriously conceived and inter-wound with 
"nonsense." It is about as factual as the "fact" that God sends illness as 
punishment, or that illness is the unwanted gift of mischievous demons. 

Now: Churchmen of the Middle Ages could draw diagrams of 
various portions of the human body that were afflicted as the result of 
indulging in particular sins. Logical minds at one time found those 
diagrams quite convincing, and patients with certain afflictions in 
certain areas of the body would confess to having committed the 
various sins that were involved. The entire structure of beliefs made 
sense within itself. A man might be bom deformed or sickly because of 
the sins of his father. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


205 


The scientific framework is basically, now, just as senseless, though 
within it the facts often seem to prove themselves out, also. There are 
viruses, for example. Your beliefs become self-evident realities. It 
would be impossible to discuss human suffering without taking that into 
consideration. Ideas are transmitted from generation to generation — and 
those ideas are the carriers of all of your reality, its joys and its agonies. 
Science, however, is all in all (underlined) a poor healer. The church's 
concepts at least gave suffering a kind of dignity: It did (underlined) 
come from God — an unwelcome gift, perhaps — but after all it was 
punishment handed out from a firm father for a child's own good. 

Science disconnected fact from religious truth, of course. In a 
universe formed by chance, with the survival of the fittest as the main 
rule of good behavior, illness became a kind of crime against a species 
itself. It meant you were unfit, and hence brought about all kinds of 
questions not seriously asked before. 

Did those "genetically inferior," for example, have the right to 
reproduce?' Illness was thought to come like a storm, the result of 
physical forces against which the individual had little recourse. The 
"new" Freudian ideas of the unsavory unconscious led further to a new 
dilemma, for it was then — as it is now — widely believed that as the 
result of experiences in infancy the subconscious, or unconscious, 
might very well sabotage the best interests of the conscious personality, 
and trick it into illness and disaster. 

In a way, that concept puts a psychological devil in place of the 
metaphysical one. If life itself is seen scientifically as having no real 
meaning, then suffering, of course, must also be seen as meaningless. 
The individual becomes a victim of chance insofar as his birth, the 
events of his life, and his death are concerned. Illness becomes his most 
direct encounter with the seeming meaninglessness of personal 
existence (all quite intently). 

You affect the structure of your body through your thoughts. If you 
believe in heredity, heredity itself becomes a strong suggestive factor in 
your life, and can help bring about the precise malady in the body that 
you believed was there all along , until finally your scientific 
instruments uncover the "faulty mechanism," or whatever, and there is 
the evidence for all to see. 



206 


Jane Roberts 


(Pause at 9:50.) There are obviously some conditions that in your 
terms are inherited, showing themselves almost instantly after birth, but 
these are of a very limited number in proportion to those diseases you 
believe are hereditary — many cancers, heart problems, arthritic or 
rheumatoid disorders. And in many cases of inherited difficulties, 
changes could be effected for the better, through the utilization of other 
mental methods that we will certainly get to someday. 

There are as many kinds of suffering as there are kinds of joy, and 
there is no one simple answer that can be given. As human creatures 
you accept the conditions of life. You create from those conditions the 
experiences of your days. You are bom into belief systems as you are 
bom into physical centuries, and part of the entire picture is the 
freedom of interpreting the experiences of life in multitudinous 
fashions (all intently). The meaning, nature, dignity or shame of 
suffering will be interpreted according to your systems of belief. I hope 
to give you along the way a picture of reality that puts suffering in its 
proper perspective, but it is a most difficult subject to cover because it 
touches most deeply upon your hopes for yourselves and for mankind, 
and your fears for yourselves and for mankind. 

Give us a moment. . . . You have taught yourselves to be aware of 
and to follow only certain portions of your own consciousnesses, so that 
mentally you consider certain subjects taboo. Thoughts of death and 
suffering are among those. In a species geared above all to the survival 
of the fittest, and the competition among species, then any touch of 
suffering or pain, or thoughts of death, become dishonorable, 
biologically shameful, cowardly, nearly insane. Life is to be pursued at 
all costs — not because it is innately meaningful, but because it is the 
only game going, and it is a game of chance at best. One life is all you 
have, and that one is everywhere beset by the threat of illness, disaster, 
and war — and if you escape such drastic circumstances, then you are 
still left with a life that is the result of no more than lifeless elements 
briefly coming into a consciousness and vitality that is bound to end. 

(Pause at 10:05. Jane had delivered all of the above material for Seth 
with an emphatic mixture of speed, irony, and amusement.) 

In that framework, even the emotions of love and exaltation are seen 
as no more than the erratic activity of neurons firing 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


207 


(pause), or of chemicals reacting to chemicals. Those beliefs alone 
bring on suffering. All of science, in your time, has been set up to 
promote beliefs that run in direct contradiction to the knowledge of 
man's heart. Science has, you have noted, denied emotional truth. It is 
not simply that science denies the validity of emotional experience, but 
that it has believed so firmly that knowledge can only be acquired from 
the outside, from observing the exterior of nature. 

I spoke about the quality of life, and it is true to say that in at least 
many centuries past, if men and women may have died earlier, they 
also lived lives of fuller, more satisfying quality — and I do not want to 
be misinterpreted in that direction. 

Now, it is also true that in some of its aspects religion has glorified 
suffering, elevated it to [be] one of the prime virtues — and it has 
degraded it at other times, seeing the ill as possessed by devils, or 
seeing the insane as less than human. So there are many issues 
involved. 

Science, however, seeing the body as a mechanism, has promoted the 
idea that consciousness is trapped within a mechanical model, that 
man's suffering is mechanically caused in that regard: You simply give 
the machine some better parts and all will be well (amused). Science 
also operates as magic, of course, so on some occasions the belief in 
science itself will seemingly- work miracles: The new heart will give a 
man new heart, for example. 

(10:16. After discussing David Yoder's personal situation, Seth re- 
turned to his more generalized material at 10:30.) 

Illness is used as a part of man's motivations. What I mean is that 
there is no human motivation that may not at some time be involved 
with illness, for often it is a means to a desired end — a method of 
achieving something a person thinks may not be achieved otherwise. 

One man might use it to achieve success. One might use it to achieve 
failure. A person might use it as a means of showing pride or humility, 
of looking for attention or escaping it. Illness is often another mode of 
expression, but nowhere does science mention that illness might have 
its purpose, or its groups of purposes, and I do not mean that the 
purposes themselves are necessarily derogatory. Illnesses are often 
misguided attempts to attain something the person thinks important. 
[Sickness] can be 



208 


Jane Roberts 


a badge of honor or dishonor — but there can be no question, when you 
look at the human picture, that to a certain extent, but an important one, 
suffering not only has its purposes and uses, but is actively sought for 
one reason or another. 

Most people do not seek out suffering's extreme experience, but 
within those extremes there are multitudinous degrees of stimuli that 
could be considered painful, that are actively sought. Man's 
involvement in sports is an instant example, of course, where society's 
rewards and the promise of spectacular bodily achievement lead 
athletes into activities that would be considered most painful by the 
ordinary individual. People climb mountains, willingly undergoing a 
good bit of suffering in the pursuit of such goals. 

(10:37. Seth came through with some more information concerning 
David. Then:) 

I do not want any of this to appear too simplistic, but we must begin 
somewhere in this kind of discussion. . . . This is far from the entire 
story [of illness], but it is enough for this evening's saga. When you 
can, encourage your fine wife to follow your example in determining 
not to worry. It should be the first commandment. 

("Okay.") 

My heartiest regards, and a fond good evening. 

("Thank you, Seth, and the same to you. ") 

(10:45 p.m. "My God, your fingers must be read's to fall off!" Jane 
exclaimed as she quickly came out of her excellent trance state. She moved 
over to the couch from her rocker. "Why didn't you ask for a break?" 

"You didn't seem to want to take one. " But also, I'd become so inter- 
ested in the session that I forgot everything else. My light hand was tired 
now, though. 

"I don 't remember much of that, " Jane said, "but I've got the feeling 
that Seth meant the material to defuse some of my own thoughts lately — 
that there isn't any answer for all of the pain and suffering in the world 
— that the whole thing is so vast that you can 't say or do anything that 
will be of much use to anyone. ..." 

Which might help account, I told Jane, for her response to David's 
illness, including the book she's making for him. I also said that even 
though Seth hadn't called this session dictation for Dreams, he very well 
could have done so: Large portions of it might at least help answer 
people's questions.) 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


209 


NOTE. Session 895 

1 . Seth certainly touched upon a question that's loaded with ethical and 
legal dilemmas; many of these have grown out of recent scientific 
advances in genetics. Some moral philosophers, medical geneticists, 
physicians, lawyers, and religious leaders believe that those who carry 
genes for serious genetic diseases do not have the right to reproduce. 
Others of similar background maintain just the opposite — that the right 
to recreate one's kind is inalienable. Questions abound involving 
amniocentesis (examination of the fluid in the womb to detect genetic 
defects in the fetus); therapeutic abortion; artificial insemination; repro- 
duction by in vitro fertilization; embryo transfer (surrogate 
motherhood); the responsibilities of the legal, medical and religious 
communities; whether mentally retarded, genetically defective people 
should receive life-prolonging medical treatment, and so forth. Years 
are expected to pass before our legal system alone catches up with the 
scientific progress in genetics — but, ironically, continuing advances in 
the field are bound to complicate even further the whole series of 
questions. 


SESSION 8 9 6- January 16, 1980 

9:09 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(Jane has been taking time off from God of Jane and If We Live Again 
to work on the Introduction for Sue Watkins's Conversation With Seth. 
Sue took the manuscript for Conversations with her when she went to 
Florida for the month with her son and parents. If those three members of 
her family are enjoying a vacation, Sue isn't — but at least she's working 
on her book in warm weather! 

I finished typing Monday evening's session from my notes just in time 
to get ready for this one. In the meantime Jane called David Yoder at the 
hospital. To her surprise he sounded weaker than he had the last time 
she'd spoken to him, and at his request my planned visit tomorrow was 
put off until Friday afternoon. 

Next, Jane quickly went over my recent batch of "Sayre-environment 
dreams, " as Seth called them. I've recorded six of those long and compli- 



210 


Jane Roberts 


cated dreams, set in my hometown, since December 22; in them I explored 
my various, sometimes contradictory beliefs about writing and painting, 
my relationships with society and the marketplace, and with my [deceased] 
father as he represented certain other beliefs. I'd recently asked Jane if 
Seth would comment. 

Tonight Seth did comment — and very perceptively put all of the 
dreams together. "In your heart Sayre stands for your childhood, " he said 
in conclusion, "and to that extent, to you personally, for the childhood of 
all men. For, again to some extent, each man feels that somehow humanity 
as a whole was born at his own birth. " 

We took a break at 9:40. "I'll tell you, " Jane said as I congratulated 
her, "I just glanced at those dreams in your notebook. I didn't take more 
than five minutes. I'll be damned." She laughed, pleased at Seth's han- 
dling of them. 

"My memories of those dream events are just as real as the memories 
of anything else I've done lately, " I said. "Going shopping, or working, 
or whatever. ..." I've always been intrigued by the simple observation 
that for me at least, once they begin moving into the past dream events 
assume an increasingly important place in my life. I think that upon 
awakening in the present, one is much more likely to call a dream "just 
a dream, " and not assign to it a reality and validity equal to one's "real" 
experience in the waking state. 

Jane wanted to quickly return to the session. Even though the follow- 
ing material isn't book dictation per se, I'm presenting it for obvious 
reasons. Resume at 9:52.) 

A continuation of our discussion (begun in the last session) on 
suffering. 

I feel sometimes as if I am expected to justify life's conditions, when 
of course they do not need any such justification. 

Your beliefs close you off from much otherwise quite-available 
knowledge concerning man's psychology — knowledge that would serve 
to answer many questions usually asked about the reasons for suffering. 
Other questions, it is true, are more difficult to answer. Men and 
women are bom, however, with curiosity about all sensations, and 
about all possible life experiences. They are thirsty for experience of all 
kinds. Their curiosity is not limited to the pretty or the mundane. 

Men and women are bom with a desire to push beyond the limits — 
to, in quotes (amused and loudly): "explore where no man has ever 
gone before" — a bastard version of the introduction [to 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value fulfillment 


211 


a famous television program], I believe. Men and women are bom with 
a sense of drama, a need of excitement. Life itself is excitement. The 
quietest mood rides the thrust of spectacular molecular activity. 

You forget many of your quite natural inclinations, feelings, and 
inner fantasies as you mature into adults, because they do not fit into 
the picture of the kind of people, or experience, or species you have 
been taught to believe you are. As a result, many of the events of your 
lives that are the natural extensions of those feelings appear alien 
(pause), against your deepest wishes, or thrust upon you, either by 
outside agencies or by a mischievous subconscious. 

The thoughts of children give excellent clues as to mankind's nature, 
but many adults do not remember any childhood thoughts except those 
that fit, or seem to fit, in with their beliefs about childhood. 

Children play at getting killed. They try to imagine what death is 
like. They imagine what it would be like to fall from a wall like 
Humpty-Dumpty, or to break their necks. They imagine tragic roles 
with as much creative abandon as they imagine roles of which adults 
might approve. They are often quite aware of "willing" themselves sick 
to get out of difficult situations — and of willing themselves well again 
(with humor). 1 

They quickly leam to forget their parts in such episodes, so that later, 
when as adults they find themselves ill they not only forget that they 
caused the illness to begin with, but unfortunately they forget how to 
will themselves well again. 

(10:05.) As I said, there are all ranges of suffering, and I am 
beginning this discussion, which I will continue now and then in 
between regular book dictation, in a very general manner. In times past 
in particular, though the custom is not dead, men purged themselves, 
wore ashes and beat themselves with chains, or went hungry or 
otherwise deprived themselves. They suffered, in other words, for 
religion's sake. It was not just that they believed suffering was good for 
the soul — a statement which can or cannot be true, incidentally, and I 
will go into that later — but they understood something else: The body 
will only take so much suffering when it releases consciousness. So 
they hoped to achieve religious ecstasy. 

Religious ecstasy does not need physical suffering as a stimu- 



212 


Jane Roberts 


lus, and such a means in the overall (underlined) will work against 
religious understanding. Those episodes, however, represent one of the 
ways in which man can actively seek suffering as a means to another 
end, and it is beside the point to say that such activity is not natural, 
since it exists within nature's framework. 

(Long pause.) Discipline is a form of applied suffering, as discipline 
is usually used. People are not taught to understand the great 
dimensions of their own capacity for experience. It is natural for a child 
to be curious about suffering, to want to know what it is, to see it — and 
by doing so he (or she) learns to avoid the suffering he does not want, 
to help others avoid suffering that they do not want, and to understand, 
more importantly, the gradations of emotion and sensation that are his 
heritage. [As an adult] he will not inflict pain upon others if he 
understands this, for he will allow himself to feel the validity of his 
own emotions. 

If you deny yourself the direct experience of your own emotions, but 
muffle them, say, through too-strict discipline, then you can hurt others 
much more easily, for you project your deadened emotional state upon 
them — as in the Nazi war camps [men] followed orders, torturing other 
people — and you do that first of all by deadening your own sensitivity 
to pain, and by repressing your emotions. 

(10:25.) Man's vulnerability to pain helps him sympathize with 
others, and therefore helps him to more actively alleviate whatever 
unnecessary causes of pain exist in society. 

Give us a moment. . . . That will be it for the evening. My heartiest 
regards to each of you. I have but one more point to make: Each 
person's experience of a painful nature is also registered on the part of 
what we will call the world's mind. Each, say, failure, or 
disappointment, or unresolved problem that results in suffering, 
becomes a part of the world's experience: This way or that way does 
not work, or this way or that way has been tried, with poor results. So 
in that way even weaknesses or failures of suffering are resolved, or 
rather redeemed as adjustments are made in the light of those data. 

In that regard, each person lives his or her life privately, and yet for 
all of humanity. Each person tries out new challenges, new 
circumstances, new achievements from a unique viewpoint, 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


213 


for himself or herself, and for the entire mass of humanity as well. 

(Heartily:) End of session. A fond good evening. 

("Thank you very much, Seth. Good night. ") 

(10:27 p.m. "Boy, that's excellent stuff," I said to Jane as she came 
out of a good trance and a good delivery. "I sure hope we can use it 
somehow, somewhere, instead of letting it just sit on a shelf. " So even 
though I'd inserted the last [nonbook] session into Dreams, I didn't make 
any quick decision about doing the same thing with this one. 

"I'm wondering about that too, " Jane said. "But the heck with it. 
Maybe someday we'll be able to use it in a book, but in the meantime I'm 
not going to worry about it. Maybe he'll keep on with it like this, and it'll 
end up in a book of its own someday. Who knows?" 

I laughed, and told her that with her new resolve not to worry she 
sounded like me.) 


NOTE. Session 896 

1 . Seth's idea that in their play children "try to imagine what death is 
like" certainly adds an intuitive dimension to my own activities as a 
child. "Cowboys and Indians" was our gang's favorite game back in 
Sayre in the late 1920s, and as we roamed the nearby fields all of us 
made believe we killed our enemies and / or were killed ourselves. We 
had great fun, and used to play such games to the point of exhaustion. 

I'll also endorse Seth's statement that children "are often quite aware 
of willing themselves sick to get out of difficult situations." I remember 
very well doing that on certain occasions — usually to avoid some 
school activity — and that even then I was surprised because my parents 
didn't catch on to what I was up to. (Getting well after the danger 
period had passed was no problem!) 

Jane said I'd never told her about getting sick on purpose, although I 
thought I had. I asked her if she'd ever done that. "Sure," she said. "I 
know that sometimes I made myself sick to get out of stuff like 
diagramming sentences and doing multiplication tables, in Catholic 
grade school. I was terrified of those things — I think it was in the fourth 
grade. I think I gave myself the mumps once, too." 



214 


Jane Roberts 


Jane added that her group of playmates hadn't engaged in the same 
sort of games that mine had. "We might have played dead now and then 
— you know, lain down and closed our eyes, but that would be all." In 
fifth-grade history class, in the convent she'd been sent to because her 
mother was hospitalized for treatment of severe rheumatoid arthritis, 
Jane learned about Marie Antoinette, queen of France, who had been 
guillotined in Paris in 1793. "I used to play being her all by myself," 
she said. "I'd be brave and scornful, knowing I was going to be 
beheaded — that sort of thing." 

We were a bit surprised, then, to realize that for both of us at least 
some of our "willful" experiences had revolved around our early school 
days. 


SESSION 8 97- January 21, 1980 

9:15 P.M. MONDAY 

(The weather is still very warm for this time of year; the temperature is 
often above freezing in the daytime, and when we do get a dusting of 
snow it soon melts on the bare ground. This morning I took David Yoder 
home from the hospital, and this afternoon I took our tiger cat, Billy, to 
the veterinarian. Billy hasn't acted well since last Saturday, and his 
beautiful coat has lost its luster. He had a temperature of 105° when the 
vet gave him a shot and prescribed some pills. Yet the doctor didn't really 
know why the cat is sick. Jane and I wondered what role Billy's illness 
might play in our affair with David — surely a way of thinking that 
would have been quite alien to us before the advent of the Seth material. 

We'd also noticed that as soon as Billy lost his appetite his littermate, 
Mitzi, became "just a little busybody, " as Jane put it, playing and run- 
ning about the house and out on the porches, as if in her own way she 
was trying to compensate for Billy's unaccustomed lack of activity. 

"I wouldn't mind getting something from Seth on why Billy got sick, " 
I said to Jane after supper. She replied that she'd rather wait on the 
request: She was becoming very relaxed, and didn't want to get involved 
with "deep questions" that might interfere with her increasingly comfort- 
able state. In fact, my wife just hoped she could hold the session. She'd 
been "stewing" about David, the state of the world, human frailty, Billy, 
and herself, and had had to make strong efforts to change her thinking. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value fulfillment 


215 


Jane knew, however, that provided she held the session Seth's material 
would be dictation for Dreams. She'd picked up that from him while 
doing the dishes tonight.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

( Whispering : "Good evening. ") 

Now: Dictation. Again, your world was not created, then, by some 
exteriorized, objectified God who created it from the outside, so to 
speak, and set it into motion. Many [religious] theorists believe, for 
example, that such a God created the world in such a fashion, and that 
the process of decay began at almost the same hypothetical moment 
that the creation ended. 

Such an idea is much like some scientific ones, that see the universe 
running down, [with energy] being dissipated and order gradually 
disintegrating into chaos. Both versions conceive of a finished creation, 
though one is a divine production and the other is a result of nothing 
more than happenstance . 

(Pause.) All in all, however, we are speaking of a constant creation, 
even though I must explain it in serial terms. We are discussing a model 
of the universe in which creation is continuous, spontaneously 
occurring everywhere, and everywhere simultaneously, in a kind of 
spacious present, from which all experiences with time emerge. In this 
model there is always new energy, and all systems are open, even 
though they may seem to operate separately. Once again, also, we are 
considering a model that is based upon the active cooperation of each 
of its parts, which in one way or another also participate in the 
experience of the whole. 

In this model, changes of form are the result of creative syntheses. 
This model is seen to have its origin (long pause, eyes closed) within a 
vast, infinite, divine subjectivity — a subjectivity that is within each unit 
of consciousness, whatever its degree. A subjective divinity, then, that 
is within creation itself, a multidimensional creativity of such 
proportions that it is itself the creator and its creations at the same time. 

(Long pause at 9:37, one of many.) This divine psychological process 
— and "process" is not the best word here — this divine psychological 
state of relatedness forms from its own being worlds within worlds. 
Your universe is not the only one. Nothing exists isolate in nature, and 
to that extent the very existence of your universe presupposes the 
existence of others. 



216 


Jane Roberts 


These were, and are, and will be, created in the same fashion as that I 
have explained — and again, all such systems are open, even though 
operationally they may appear not to be. 

There are literally infinite numbers of sequences, faultlessly 
activated, that make the existence of your own world possible. I admit 
that it is sometimes inconceivable to me that a human being can 
imagine his world to be meaningless, for the very existence of one 
human body speaks of an almost unbelievable molecular and cellular 
cooperation that could hardly result through the bounty of the most 
auspicious works of chance. 

(Jane's delivery for Seth hadn't been her fastest by any means, al- 
though that "energy personality essence" closed out the paragraph above 
quite intently and with more than a little amusement. But now her pace 
slowed down even more; she used many long pauses.) 

In a manner of speaking, your universe and all others spring from a 
dimension that is the creative source for all realities — a basic dream 
universe, so to speak, a divine psychological bed where subjective 
being is sparked, illuminated, stimulated, pierced, by its own infinite 
desire for creativity. The source of its power is so great that its 
imaginings become worlds, but it is endowed with a creativity of such 
splendor that it seeks the finest fulfillment, for even the smallest of its 
thoughts and all of its potentials are directed with a good intent that is 
literally beyond all imagining. 

(9:47.) That good intent is apparent within your world. It is obvious 
in the cooperative ventures that unite, say, the mineral, plant, and 
animal kingdoms, the relationship of bee to flower. And your beliefs to 
the contrary, you have closed your minds to man's own cooperative 
nature, to his i nn ate desire for fellowship, his natural bent for taking 
care of others, and (with elaborate, if gentle emphasis) for altruistic 
behavior. But we will discuss those matters later in our book. 

Take a brief break. 

(9:50. Jane was very relaxed the moment she came out of trance. I 
didn't mention the frequent long pauses she'd been taking; she'd spent 
three minutes delivering the last paragraph alone. Her head moved 
loosely. Her eyelids fluttered. "He shouldn 't have given me the break, " 
she said. "This is the worst I've been. ... I wanted to get back to two- 
hour sessions. ..." She sat quietly while I worked on this note. By "worst" 
she meant relaxed, of course. I told her there was no need to continue the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


217 


session. "I don 't know if I can go back in, I'm so. ..." Her head kept dipping 
down. She lit a cigarette. "I'm just waiting. " (See Note 1 for the rest of the 
session.) 


NOTE. Session 897 

1. (Seth returned at 9:59.) 

"End of dictation. 

"Now: Either life has meaning or it does not. It ca nn ot sometimes 
have meaning, and sometimes not — or man's life cannot have meaning 
while the lives of other species do not. But the meaning may not always 
be apparent, for of course when we discuss it, we discuss it from a 
human viewpoint. 

"Why, for example, did David fall ill? We have discussed that, 
dealing with several levels — but meanings often fall into categories that 
become almost indescribable." 

(10:05.) "Your cat, in a strange fashion, reacted to the weather — not 
reacted so much as identified with its interpretation of the weather's 
mood — became part of the weather in a fashion, opened up to it, but 
became depressed in your terms. 

"To the cat this is an experience. There is some additional 
implication, in that he picked up your joint feelings about your friend 
David — but that is not the cause, simply an added coloration. The give- 
and-take of weather conditions and animal behavior is little understood. 
Your other cat, for example, reacted in an opposite fashion, actively 
providing herself with additional stimuli. 

"We will say more at a later date. A fond good evening." 

("Thank you, Seth.") 

(10:10 p.m. "I thought you didn't want Seth to say anything about 
Billy tonight? " I asked Jane as she easily came out of trance. 

She answered the question in her own way. "That was my fault, though 
— that was charged material, he would have said more. Stuff about 
illness is still pretty charged for me. " I thought her own physical difficul- 
ties must play a strong role here, although she didn't say so. "It makes me 
mad, " Jane said quietly. "At break I could feel him getting all ready to 
go into Billy's condition, and I began to get all tight inside. I didn't tell 
you. Then I said to myself, 'Seth, just go into it, that's all. ’ So why didn 't 
he say the cat's going to be all right?" 



218 


Jane Roberts 


In reply to another of my questions, she said her emotional charge was 
also involved with the death of our cat, Billy One, in February 1979. 
Billy One had been, obviously, the predecessor to the Billy we have now; 
the present Billy is remarkably similar to him in looks and temperament. 
"I'm disgusted with myself, "Jane said. "I wish we'd called this one Willy, 
but I know that's all superstitious nonsense. " 

And even as the session ended, I heard Mitzi out in the kitchen, 
playing with the wadded-up paper ball I'd made for her. The cellar door 
was open. Again and again she knocked the ball down the cellar steps, 
raced down after it, carried it back upstairs and sent it flying down again 
— -just as though, it seemed, she still had to perform for us while a 
recuperating Billy dozed on a comfortable chair in the living room. 

In the 840th session for Chapter 6 o/Mass Events, see my account of 
Billy One's death.) 


SESSION 898— January 30, 1980 

9:28 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(On January 23 I mailed to our publisher Jane's Introduction for Sue 
Watkins 's Conversations With Seth. 

Since holding the last [897th] book session nine days ago, Jane has 
delivered three remarkable private sessions for Seth. 1 Tonight she was 
quite at ease, and had been tempted to skip the session and just paint. 
She's really attracted by strong, bright color. "I love the red couch cover 
you're sitting on, " she said as we waited for the session — and indeed, the 
corded fabric glowed in the warm light cast by the table lamp on the room 
divider behind the couch; the divider separates the kitchen from the living 
room. 

I told Jane she needn 't have a session if she wanted to paint, but that 
if she did go into trance I wouldn't mind getting something from Seth on 
the dream I'd had early this morning. In it I'd been a woman who was 
the same age as my father. The fact that my father is dead didn 't enter 
into the dream.) 

Dictation. 

("All right. ") 

(Long pause.) The waking state as you think of it is a specialized 
extension of the dream state, and emerges from it to the surface of your 
awareness, just as your physical locations are specified extensions of 
locations that exist first within the realm of mind. 



Dreams. "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


219 


The waking state, then, has its source in the dream state, and all of 
the objects, environment, and experience that are familiar to you in the 
waking state also originate in that inner dimension. 

(Pause.) When you examine the state of dreams, however, you do it 
as a rule from the framework of waking reality. You try to measure the 
dimension of dream experience by applying the rules of reality that are 
your usual criteria for judging events. Therefore, you are not able to 
perceive the true characteristics of the dreaming state except on those 
few occasions when you "come awake" within your dreams — a matter 
we will discuss later on in this book. But in a manner of speaking, it is 
true to say that the universe was created in the same fashion that your 
own thoughts and dreams happen: spontaneously and yet with a built-in 
amazing order, and an inner organization. You think your thoughts and 
you dream your dreams without any clear knowledge of the incredible 
processes involved therein, yet those processes are the very ones that 
are behind the existence of the universe itself. 

Also, in a manner of speaking, you are yourselves the ancient 
dreamers who dreamed your world into being. You must understand 
that I am not saying that you are passive, fleeting dreamers, lost in 
some divine mind, but that you are the unique creative manifestations 
of a divine intelligence whose creativity is responsible for all realities, 
which are themselves endowed with creative abilities of their own, with 
the potential and desire for fulfillment — inheritors indeed of the divine 
processes themselves. Spontaneity knows its own order. 

(9:41.) I have said that many times. The world's parts come 
spontaneously together, with an order that basically defies the smaller 
laws of cause and effect, or before and afterward. In that regard, again, 
your dreaming state presents you with many clues about the source of 
your own lives and that of your world. 

Computers, however grand and complicated, cannot dream, and so 
for all of their incredible banks of information, they must lack the kind 
of unspoken knowing knowledge that the smallest plant or seed 
possesses. Nor can any amount of information "possessed" or processed 
by any computer compare with the unspoken knowing knowledge that 
is possessed by the atoms and molecules that compose such an 
instrument. The computer is not equipped to perceive that kind of 
knowing. It is not equipped for such an endeavor because it cannot 
dream. In 



220 


Jane Roberts 


dreams the innate knowledge of the atoms and molecules is combined 
and translated. It serves as the bed of perceptual information and 
knowledge from which the dreaming state arises in its physical form. 

You are subjectively "alive" before your birth. You will be 
subjectively alive after your death. Your subjective life is now 
interpreted through the specialized state of consciousness that you call 
the waking one, in which you recognize as real only experience that 
falls within certain space and time coordinates. Your greater reality 
exists outside those coordinates, and so does the reality of the universe. 
(Pause.) You create lives for yourselves, changing them as you go 
along, as a writer might change a book, altering the circumstances, 
changing the plots. The writer only knows that he or she creates without 
understanding the spontaneous order with which the creativity happens. 
The processes occur at another level of consciousness (underlined). 

In the most basic of ways, the world is formed from the inside out, 
and from dreaming reality into the physical one — and those processes 
happen at another level of consciousness (quietly emphatic). 

Take a break. 

(9:55. I thought the break came rather early. Jane's delivery had 
fluctuated between using many pauses and being rather fast. "I was sort 
of getting that it would be something like that after supper, " she said. 
She didn't think the session would be a long one. Seth returned at 10:10 
— and he did discuss my dream until he said good night at 10:30 p.m.) 


NOTE. Session 898 

1. We called those three very penetrating sessions private, or deleted, 
because they grew out of our own reactions to David Yoder's 
challenges, to the illness of our cat Billy, to the playful antics of Billy's 
littermate Mitzi, and to several other personal matters. All of that 
material has a general appeal, however, and I wish I could show in a 
few words the variety and depth of Seth's information. 

"Your body consciousness is like the consciousness of any animal," 
he told us on January 23, for example. "Mitzi, running up and down the 
[cellar] stairs, is an example of the love of excite- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


221 


ment and activity with which man and animals are innately endowed. 
Animals enjoy being petted, stroked, and loved. They react in their own 
ways to suggestion, and in that regard your body consciousness 
responds to your conscious treatment of it. Think of your body, for the 
purpose of this discussion, as a healthy animal. . . . An im a ls and your 
own body consciousnesses have little concept of age . In a fashion 
almost impossible to describe, [those] consciousnesses — of the body 
and the animals — are 'young' in each moment of their existences. I am 
taking it for granted that you understand that I am referring to the 'men- 
tal attitude' of animals and of the body consciousness, for they do 
possess their own mental attributes — psychological colorations — and 
above all, emotional 'states.' " 

Seth's material largely opposes science's mechanistic model of the 
body wearing down within certain age limits, abetted as that model is 
by the power of the beliefs that say it will. He had much to say about 
how the out-of-place stresses we impose upon ourselves through our 
fearful projections into the future adversely affect our body 
consciousnesses, which are focused in the present. Telepathy, 
"molecular mentality," and cellular consciousness are deeply involved 
in all of this. 


SESSION 899— February 6, 1980 

8:51 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(We didn't hold the session scheduled for last Monday evening so that we 
could rest. 

I estimate that I'm two-thirds finished with the notes I want to do for 
Mass Events. Along with Dreams, Jane is hack working on If We Live 
Again and God of Jane. She's on a "creative high" with the latter.' The 
complicated events surrounding Iran and Three Mile Island continue to 
develop, as consciousness explores itself in those areas. 2 

Yesterday and earlier today Jane had scribbled down notes she was 
picking up from Seth; she'd put them in the session notebook in case I 
had time to type them. [I didn't.] Then later today she reread all of the 
material Seth has given on Dreams . ) 

Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 



222 


Jane Roberts 


Dictation. (Pause.) While men had their dream bodies alone they 
enjoyed a remarkable freedom, of course, for those bodies did not have 
to be fed or clothed. They did not have to operate under the law of 
gravity. Men could wander as they wished about the landscape. They 
did not yet identify themselves to any great degree (underlined) as 
being themselves separate from either the environment or other 
creatures. They knew themselves to be themselves, but their identities 
were not as closely allied with their forms as is now the case. 

The dream world was bound to waken, however, for that was the 
course it had set itself upon. This awakening, again, happened 
spontaneously, and yet with its own order. In the terms of this 
discussion the other creatures of the earth actually awakened before 
man did, and relatively speaking, their dream bodies formed 
themselves into physical ones before man's did. The animals became 
physically effective, therefore, while to some degree man still lingered 
in that dream reality. 

The plants awakened before the animals — and there are reasons for 
these varying degrees of "wakefulness" that have nothing to do 
basically with the differentiations of specieshood as defined by science 
from the outside, but have to do with the inner affiliations of 
consciousness, and with species or families of consciousness. Those 
affiliations fell into being as all of the consciousnesses that were 
embarked upon physical reality divided up (long pause) the almost 
unimaginable creative achievements that would be responsible for the 
physically effective world. 

(9:04.) Again, the environment as you think of it is composed of 
living consciousness. Ancient religions, for example, speak of nature's 
spirits, and such terms represent memories dating from prehistory. Part 
of consciousness, then, transformed itself into what you think of as 
nature — the vast sweep of the continents, the oceans and the rivers, the 
mountains and the valleys, the body of the Jand. The creative thrust of 
the physical world must rise from that living structure. 

(With emphasis:) In a matter of speaking (underlined), the birds and 
the insects are indeed living portions of the earth flying, even as, again 
in a matter of speaking (in parentheses) (with a smile and again with an 
emphasis upon the word "matter"), bears and wolves and cows and cats 
represent the earth turning itself into 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value fulfillment 


223 


creatures that live upon its own surface. And in a matter of speaking, 
again, man becomes the earth thinking, and thinking his own thoughts, 
man in his way specializes in the conscious work of the world — a work 
that is dependent upon the indispensable "unconscious" work of the rest 
of nature, a nature that sustains him (all very intently). And when he 
thinks, man thinks for the microbes, for the atoms and the molecules, 
for the smallest particles within his being, for the insects and for the 
rocks, for the creatures of the sky and the air and the oceans. 

Man thinks as naturally as the birds fly. He looks at physical reality 
for the rest of physical reality: He is earth coming alive to view itself 
through conscious eyes — but that consciousness is graced to be because 
it is so intimately a part of earth's framework. 

(Pause.) What was it like when man awakened from the dream 
world? 

End of chapter. 



5 


CHAPTER 

The "Garden of Eden. 
Man "Loses" His Dream 
Body and Gains a "Soul" 


(9:15.) Chapter Five: "The 'Garden of Eden.' Man 'Loses' His Dream 
Body, and Gains a 'Soul.' " 

The Garden of Eden legend represents a distorted version of man's 
awakening as a physical creature. He becomes fully operational in his 
physical body, and while awake can only sense the dream body that had 
earlier been so real to him. He now encounters his experience from 
within a body that must be fed, clothed, protected from the elements — a 
body that is subject to gravity and to earth's laws. He must use physical 
muscles to walk from place to place. He sees himself suddenly, in a leap 
of comprehension, as existing for the first time not only apart from the 
environment, but apart from all of earth's other creatures. 

The sense of separation is, in those terms, initially almost shattering. 
Yet [man] is to be the portion of nature that views itself with 
perspective. He is to be the part of nature that will specialize, again, in 
the self-conscious use of concepts. (Louder:) He will grow the flower 
of the intellect — a flower that must have its deep roots buried securely 
within the earth, and yet a flower that will 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


225 


send new psychic seeds outward, not only for itself but for the rest of 
nature, of which it is a part. 

But man looked out and felt himself suddenly separate and amazed at 
the aloneness. Now he must find food, where before his dream body did 
not need physical nourishment. Before, man had been neither male nor 
female, combining the characteristics of each, but now the physical 
bodies also specialized in terms of sexuality. Man has to physically 
procreate. Some lost ancient legends emphasized in a clearer fashion 
this sudden sexual division. By the time the Biblical legend came into 
being, however, historical events and social beliefs were transformed 
into the Adam and Eve version of events. 

On the one hand, man did indeed feel that he had fallen from a high 
estate, because he remembered that earlier freedom of dream reality — a 
reality in which the other creatures were still to some degree 
(underlined) immersed. 3 Man's mind, incidentally, at that point had all 
the abilities that you now assign to it: the great capacity for contrast of 
imagination and intellect, the drive for objectivity and for subjectivity 
(softly), the full capacity for the development of language — a keen 
mind that was as brilliant in any caveman, say, as it is in any man on a 
modem street. 

(9:35.) But if man felt suddenly alone and isolated, he was 
immediately struck by the grand variety of the world and its creatures. 
Each creature apart from himself was a new mystery. He was enchanted 
also by his own subjective reality, the body in which he found himself, 
and by the differences between himself and others like him, and the 
other creatures. He instantly began to explore (pause), to categorize, to 
point out and to name the other creatures of the earth as they came to 
his attention. 

In a fashion (underlined), it was a great creative and yet cosmic 
game that consciousness played with itself, and it did represent a new 
kind of awareness, but I want to emphasize that each version of All 
That Is is unique. Each has its purpose, though that purpose cannot be 
easily defined in your terms. Many people ask, for example: "What is 
the purpose of my life?" Meaning: "What am I meant to do?" but the 
purpose of your life, and each life, is in its being (intently). That being 
may include certain actions, but the acts themselves are only important 
in that they spring out of the essence of your life, which simply by 
being is bound to fulfill its purposes. 



226 


Jane Roberts 


(Long pause in a steady, rather fast delivery.) Man's dream body is 
still with him, of course, but the physical body now obscures it. The 
dream body cannot be harmed while the physical one can — as man 
quickly found out as he transformed his experience largely from one to 
the other. In the dream body man feared nothing. The dream body does 
not die. It exists before and after physical death. In their dream bodies 
men had watched the spectacle of animals "killing" other animals, and 
they saw the animals' dream bodies emerge unscathed. 

They saw that the earth was simply changing its forms, but that the 
identity of each unit of consciousness survived — and so, although they 
saw the picture of death, they did not recognize it as the death that to 
many people now seems an inevitable end. 

[Men] saw that there must be an exchange of physical energy for the 
world to continue. They watched the drama of the "hunter" and the 
"prey," seeing that each animal contributed so that the physical form of 
the earth could continue — but the rabbit eaten by the wolf survived in a 
dream body that men knew was its true form. When man "awakened" 
in his physical body, however, and specialized in the use of its senses, 
he no longer perceived the released dream body of the slain animal 
running away, still cavorting on the hillside. He retained memory of his 
earlier knowledge, and for a considerable period he could now and then 
recapture that knowledge. He became more and more aware of his 
physical senses, however: Some things were definitely pleasant and 
some were not. Some stimuli were to be sought out, and others 
avoided, and so over a period of time he translated the pleasant and the 
unpleasant into rough versions of good and evil. 

Basically, what made him feel good was good. He was gifted with 
strong clear instincts that were meant to lead him toward his own 
greatest development, to his own greatest fulfillment, in such a way 
that he also helped to bring about the highest potentials of all of the 
other species of consciousness (intently). His natural impulses were 
meant to provide inner directives that would guide him in just such a 
direction, so that he sought what was the best for himself and for 
others. 

(Heartily:) End of dictation. 

(9:58. After giving a few notes for Jane and me, Seth ended the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


227 


session at 10:13 p.m. "I can't remember the session now, but I think I 
covered everything I got from him yesterday and today, "Jane said.) 


NOTES. Session 899 

1. Yesterday Jane finished typing the final draft of Chapter 2 
for God of Jane. All of her work on the book is still plastic, how 
ever. As she wrote in her journal today: "Great day . . . began 
typing Chapter Three of God of Jane and the book really started 
taking off; I'm just tickled; I did great, and added lots of on- 
the-spot stuff as I typed. Did so well I almost forgot to break for 
afternoon exercises." 

That's the way she revels in her creative activities. Yet she has room 
for even more expression, for she also noted: "Feel like I'd like to do 
something different again. Small creative writing class? Something 
with tapes?" 

Personally, I like to have all the hard preliminary work done before 
I start typing a manuscript, so that I can race right through it with few 
changes. 

2. Today is day 95 of the taking of the American hostages in 
Iran (on November 4, 1979). Any expectations that our country 
had of the hostages' early release have long since dissipated. I 
can only hint at the enormously complicated situation involving 
the whole Middle East these days. The generally explosive pre 
dicament in Iran, for example, has been considerably aggra 
vated by Russia's invasion of Afghanistan over the recent 
Christmas season: Now the unbending revolutionary govern 
ment of Iran, following its own fanatical interpretation of the 
Moslem religion, must contend with at least an implied threat 
on its eastern border as the godless Russians occupy Afghani 
stan. Jane and I find it fascinating to think about — to attempt to 
trace — some of the ways by which the overall consciousness of 
the United States continually becomes involved with — entwined 
with — the consciousnesses of adversaries like Russia and Iran: 
Such consciousnesses, once created, continue to grow and to 
complicate themselves in new ways within our concept of "time." 
Obviously, on an even larger scale of activity, the consciousnesses 



228 


Jane Roberts 


of all the nations of our world contribute to the challenges and 
dilemmas swirling around the Iranian situation. 

As for the nuclear power generating plant on Three Mile Island, 
engineers have not yet been able to enter the contaminated containment 
building housing the reactor — Unit No. 2 — which came so close to a 
meltdown of its uranium fuel rods on March 28, 1979. Such an entry, to 
gather radiological data, is now planned for this April (1980). To insure 
the safety of workers, however, over 55,000 curies of radioactive 
krypton- 8 5 gas will first be vented from the containment building into 
the atmosphere. 

This prospect has already aroused much opposition — it's another 
example of the psychological stress placed upon the population of 
southeastern Pennsylvania. Studies involving the psychology of the fear 
of nuclear power, irrational and otherwise, are growing, so once again 
consciousness proliferates and explores itself in new ways: When will a 
meltdown happen? people ask, even though some of the more than 200 
nuclear power plants around the world have operated for more than 20 
years now, without a single death caused by radiation. These studies are 
accompanied by the horde of challenges surrounding the still 
unresolved, unglaniorous disposal of a constantly growing 
accumulation of nuclear waste products. 

(And I wonder: In case of a meltdown, somewhere, sometime, and 
the release of radiation into the atmosphere, how will the 
consciousnesses of uranium and plutonium fit into the overall 
consciousness engendered by that accident? In ordinary terms, 
synthetic plutonium is probably the most toxic substance on earth. Its 
15 known isotopes have radioactive half-lives of from one-fifth of a 
second to about 88 million years. Pu 238 , a high-quality isotope 
consumed in commercial nuclear reactors, has a half-life of about 88 
years. [A bomb-quality isotope, Pu 239 , has a half-life of around 24,400 
years.]) 

3. At first, as I typed this session from my notes a couple of days later, I 
thought that Seth had contradicted himself here, for earlier in the 
session he'd stated that "the other creatures of the earth actually 
awakened before man did, and relatively speaking, their dream bodies 
formed themselves into physical ones before man's did." Then I came 
to think that Seth actually meant 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


229 


that man has consciously separated himself from his dream body to a 
greater degree than other creatures have — that even though those other 
entities became "physically effective" before man did, they still retain a 
greater awareness of their dream bodies than man does. I'll try to 
remember to ask Seth to elaborate upon this point, although I also think 
he alludes to it later in this session. 


SESSION 900— February 11, 1980 

8:47 p.m. MONDAY 

(At first Jane and I thought of calling this session a deleted one — but its 
subject matter fits into Dreams too well for us to do that. 

After supper Jane reread my accounts of my dream of last Saturday 
morning. February 9, and of my waking experience the next evening. 1 
Both events had involved intense perceptions of color and/or light, and 
I'd told Jane that anything Seth cared to say about them would be most 
welcome. I'm especially intrigued by any similarities between my two 
adventures and the near-death experiences we've been reading about 
lately. In those NDE's, as they're called, people have often reported 
encounters with intense white light. I hadn't been near death during my 
own experiences, certainly, but I do feel that through them I'd glimpsed 
ever so slightly that "light of the universe" that's been so eagerly sought 
for — and sometimes reported — throughout history. 

This morning I tried to rough-in a small oil painting of myself stand- 
ing before one of those walls of crystal color I'd seen in the dream. I had 
no trouble with the self-portrait, but still ended up quite frustrated. I'd 
anticipated the failure to some extent: With mere oil paint I just couldn't 
match the iridescence of that dream wall of light and color. By session 
time I was caught. Should I junk the half-finished painting, or try to 
complete it? I could always make another attempt tomorrow morning, oj 
course, but for some reason I was rebelling at admitting my failure 
today. 

As Seth came through, Mitzi was playing her favorite game — again 
and again knocking her paper-ball toy down the steps leading into the 
celler from the kitchen, then racing down after it and carrying it back 
upstairs.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 



230 


Jane Roberts 


("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Now: Topic: The light. 

There is, as I have told you, an inner (pause) "psychological" 
universe, from which your own emerges, and that inner universe is also 
the source of Framework 2 as well. It is responsible for all physical 
effects, and is behind all physical "laws." 

It is not just that such an inner universe is different from your own, 
but that any real or practical explanation of its reality would require the 
birth of an entirely new physics — and such a development would first 
of all necessitate the birth of an entirely new philosophy. The physics 
ca nn ot come first, you see. 

It is not [so much] that such developments are beyond man's capacity 
as it is that they involve manipulations impossible to make for all 
practical purposes, from his present standpoint. He could theoretically 
move to a better vantage point in the twinkling of an eye, relatively 
speaking, but for now we must largely use analogies. Those analogies 
may lead you or Ruburt, or a few others, to a more advantageous 
vantage point, so that certain leaps become possible — but those leaps, 
you see, are not just leaps of intellect but of will and intuition alike, 
fused and focused. 

The light of your questions (pause) is, in its wav (underlined), an 
apport from that other inner universe. In your world light has certain 
properties and limits. It is physically perceived by the eyes, and to a far 
lesser degree by the skin itself. In your world light comes from the sun. 
It has been an exterior source, and in your world light and dark 
certainly appear to be opposites. 

Ruburt glimpsed some of the principles involved when you were at 
[your downtown apartments] on several occasions — once when he tried 
to write a poem about the comprehensions that simply would not be 
verbalized. 2 I do not know how to explain some of this, but in your 
terms there is (underlined) light within (underlined! darkness. Light has 
more manifestations than its physical version (intently), so that even 
when it may not be physically manifested there is light everywhere, and 
that light is the source of your physical version and its physical laws. In 
a manner of speaking, light itself forms darkness. Each unit of con- 
sciousness, whatever its degree, is, again, composed of energy — and 
that energy manifests itself with a kind of light that is not physically 
perceived: a light that is basically, now, far more in- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


231 


tense than any physical variety, and a light from which all colors 
emerge. 

The colors of which you are aware represent a very small portion of 
light's entire spectrum, just physically speaking, but the spectrum you 
recognize represents only one inconceivably small portion of other 
fuller spectrums — spectrums that exist outside of physical laws. 

(Pause at 9:06.) So-called empty spaces, either in your living room 
between objects, or the seemingly empty spaces between stars, are 
physical representations — or misrepresentations — for all of space is 
filled with the units of consciousness, alive with a light from which the 
very fires of life are lit. 

The physical senses have to screen out such perceptions. That light, 
however, is literally everywhere at once, and it is a "knowing light," as 
Ruburt's [William] James perceived. 3 

Now: On certain occasions, sometimes near the point of death, but 
often simply in conscious states outside of the body, man is able to 
perceive that kind of light. In some out-of-body experiences Ruburt, for 
example, saw colors more dazzling than any physical ones, and you 
saw the same kind of colors in your dream. They are a part of your 
inner senses' larger spectrum of perception, and in the dream state you 
were not relying upon your physical senses at all. 

In that dream your worries were initially reflected — worries that your 
friend Floyd has also encountered on his own about virility and age,' so 
you saw the two of you in a five-and-ten-cent store, simply representing 
the world of commerce, where items are sold: Did you still have a value 
in that world? Were you still virile? You were each to take your test. 
(Pause.) Others saw you but were unconcerned, showing that the 
concern was your own, but also expressing the feeling that the world 
might not really care. 

Instead of the test, you are greeted with a vision of the shimmering 
glass w r ith its glowing colors and prisms, rich and intricate, 
representing the true source of life and sexuality itself — the vast 
multidimensional mosaic of which sexuality is but one facet. You were 
viewing your representation of the many-faceted light of your own 
being. 

Now: The lamplight episode. Here you did as you supposed. You 
viewed that inner light, but the lampshades had two pur- 



232 


Jane Roberts 


poses: one, as you surmised, to give you a comforting image, literally 
to shade your eyes. Ruburt was correct, however, in seeing the 
connection between the lampshades and the Nazi experiments (in 
World War II) with human skin. The movie (on television last night), 
about cloning and Nazi atrocities, had made you wonder about the 
nature of life once again, and man's immortality. The connection with 
cloning came out in the lampshades made of (human) skins, in the old 
news stories — though your lampshades merely stood for those, and 
were of fabric. The connection was beneath, however, and also 
represented your feeling that even those people tortured to death did 
live again. They were not extinguished. Their consciousnesses were 
indeed like bulbs, say, turned on in new lamps. The lights connected 
life and death, then. The lights also represented pure knowing. 

(9:26.) When I speak of an inner psychological universe, it is very 
difficult to explain what I mean. (Pause.) In that reality, however, 
psychological activity is not limited by any of the physical laws that 
you know. Thought, for example, has properties that you do not 
perceive — properties that not only affect matter, but that form their own 
greater patterns outside of your reality. These follow their own, say, 
laws of physics. You add on to, or build up your own reality, in other 
dimensions throughout your physical life. 

(Long pause.) The paintings that you have envisioned, for example, 
exist there, and they are every bit as real as the paintings in your studio. 
I am not speaking symbolically here. There is indeed light that you do 
not see, sound that you do not hear, sensation that you do not feel. All 
of these belong to the realm of the inner senses. The inner senses 
represent your true powers of perception. They represent, say, your 
native nonphysical perceptive "equipment." The physical senses are 
relatively easy to distinguish: You know what you see from what you 
hear. If you close your eyes, you do not see. 

The inner senses, though I have in the past described them by 
separating their functions and characteristics, basically operate together 
in such a way that in your terms it would be highly difficult to separate 
one from the others. They function with a perfect spontaneous order, 
aware of all synchronicities. In that psychological universe, then, it is 
possible for entities "to be everywhere at once," aware of everything at 
once. Your world is 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


233 


composed of such "entities" — the units of consciousness that form your 
body. The kinds of conscious minds that you have cannot hold that kind 
of information. 

(9:44.) Give us a moment. ... (A one-minute pause.) These units of 
consciousness, however, add themselves up to form psychological 
beings far greater in number than, say, the number of stars in [your] 
galaxy (over 400 billion of them), and each of those psychological 
formations has its own identity — its own soul if you prefer — its own 
purpose in the entire fabric of being. 

That is as far as we can carry that for this evening. We need some 
new carriers for the concepts. But the light itself represents that inner 
universe, and the source of all comprehension. 

End of session. 

("Can I say something? ") 

You may indeed. 

("I didn 't get far with my little painting this morning. ") 

You felt inferior to your own comprehension, for one thing. The 
colors were more brilliant than any physical ones, and so in a fashion 
you ended up trying a too-literal translation — too literal because a real 
translation would require colors and even symbols that you do not have 
on a physical basis. If you think of those colors as being inside you, 
even in your own cellular comprehension, then you will not be so 
careful. Do you follow me? 

("Yes.") 

You were too careful. 

("Yes.") 

End of session. 

("Thank you. ") 

(9:59 p.m. Her eyes closed, Jane sat quietly in her rocker for several 
moments before leaving her trance state. Usually she's "out of it" at once. 
"I kept waiting there, as though I was at the edge of something, and 
trying to get over it into something new. As though I was free-sailing. . . 

. My God, it was short enough, " she exclaimed as she looked at the clock 
for the first time. Actually, the session had lasted 1 hour 12 minutes — 
slightly longer than her average time of 1 hour 7 minutes for the last five 
sessions. Jane's sense of time had been elongated while she spoke for Seth: 
"I feel like I was really far . . . like you were getting more than you could 
translate, like you were right on the edge of something. ..." 

/ told her that Seth's idea of considering the colors in my dream as part 
of my cellular structure is an excellent one. 



234 


Jane Roberts 


A note: I can add that I didn 't give up on my dream painting after all. 
The morning after this session was held I repainted that still-wet wall of 
colors I'd struggled with the day before. I managed to carry off the 
painting this time — merely giving impressions of the colors and fore- 
going their fantastic intensities and patterns. Next, I painted a small oil 
of the lights emitted by the two table lamps in my waking experience. The 
practice on the dream painting helped: This time I was able to hint more 
easily at the great combined radiance of those lights. However, I've 
learned that contending with the light of the universe can be a humbling 
task indeed. . . .) 


NOTES. Session 900 

1 . I'll report only the portions of the dream that relate to my perceptions 
of light and color, but will describe in full my waking experience of the 
next evening. Both accounts are revised from my dream notebook: 

"My friend, Floyd Waterman (I'll call him), and I were in a five- 
and-ten-cent store in Sayre, my old hometown. We were both dressed, 
but knew that we had to take some sort of tests for sexual potency. We 
stood near the large plate-glass windows at the front of the store — quite 
exposed for all to see, in other words, including those eating at nearby 
tables, yet no one seemed to be paying any attention to us. . . . Floyd 
had to take the test first, stepping into a little booth such as a cashier 
might use. As I waited to go next I turned to look out the front windows 
— and suddenly found myself surrounded on three sides by walls of the 
most beautiful floor-to-ceiling, intricate and colorful latticework of 
diamond-shaped glass crystals I could possibly imagine. I cannot 
describe the intrinsic shimmer and sparkle of those faceted walls, 
shining and vibrating in warm oranges, browns, yellows, reds, and 
violets. Each segment of each color was held within a very thin black 
frame, as on a much cruder scale the pieces of a stained-glass window 
can be contained by channeled lead strips. I can still 'see' those dream 
lights and colors as I write this account several hours later, after 
describing them to Jane. I've thought of trying to do a painting of my 
best dream images of all time ... yet wonder how I can do it. ..." 

And for my experience of the next evening: 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


235 


"Jane and I went to bed at about 1:15 a.m., after watching a movie 
on television. Subject: World War II. Jane lay quietly on my right, her 
back to me. As I rested face up in a very pleasant and peaceful state, 
waiting to enter the sleep state, I became aware of two extremely bright 
lights shining off to my right, beyond Jane's form but within my 
peripheral vision. I knew, or saw, that these lights came from ordinary 
table lamps with columnar shades of white fabric, and that they sat on a 
round oak table like the one in our living room. The shade of the closest 
lamp was fatter and taller than its companion's, but this didn't seem to 
matter: I soon realized that both lights were supemally bright — so 
strong, indeed, that although I was very tempted to turn my head to 
look straight at them, I refrained because I wasn't sure I could stand 
facing them. I understood that the lampshades were both comforting 
and protective, however, and I felt no fear, or even unease, at this 
adventure. I knew that I wasn't dreaming, that the experience was most 
unusual. I also knew that by an act of will I could 'swing' the lights 
around in front of me if I wanted to, and I tried enough of this to verify- 
that it was possible: As they moved the lights began to grow even more 
powerful — enough to quickly convince me that I didn't want to confront 
their glare full blast, even with the shades. 

"I'd been at once reminded of my dream of the night before, in 
which I'd seen many colors. But while these lights were 'only' white, 
they were both warm and cool, indescribable in their intensity, and 
really contained all colors. 

"I enjoyed the experience for some little time as Jane slept beside 
me, then let myself drift off to sleep." 

The next morning Jane had quite an unexpected insight to add to my 
own understanding of what those lampshades stood for. I was surprised. 
Seth discussed her connection later in this session. 

2. We moved from our downtown apartments into the hill house almost 
five years ago (in March 1975), but Jane thinks she tried to write the 
poem Seth referred to several years before that. (She began speaking for 
Seth late in 1963.) I have no memory of her struggling with such a 
poem. I was most curious to see it so that I could quote a bit of it here. 
Jane has stacks of journals, poetry notebooks, manuscripts, and loose 
notes of all 



236 


Jane Roberts 


kinds, but neither of us could dig out what we wanted. Very frustrating! 
We hadn't been as careful then about dating our work as we are now. 
"But I know I didn't throw out whatever I did on that poem," Jane said. 
One of us will probably find it someday — while looking for something 
else. 

3. See the passages following Jane's entry for March 31, 1977, in 
Chapter 10 of her The After Death Journal of an American Phi- 
losopher: The World View of William James. 

4. It took me a while to realize that Seth had made a most interesting 
statement here — implying that somehow I'd picked up Floyd's worries 
about his age and virility. Floyd, Jane, and I are good friends, and he's 
well acquainted with our work. He's a few years younger than I am 
(I'm 60), but as far as I can remember the two of us haven't discussed 
such matters, even jokingly, Consciously, I enjoy and appreciate my 
age and virility each day without being concerned about them, yet my 
dream certainly revealed that on other levels I'm at least speculating 
about such issues. It's easy to say those cares represent negative beliefs, 
but I think much more than that is involved — universal questions, 
actually, that all men and women have chosen to contend with in 
physical life. 


SESSION 901— February 18, 1980 

9:20 p.m. MONDAY 

(No session, regular or deleted, was held last Wednesday evening, Feb- 
ruary 13. On that day Tam Mossman of Prentice-Hall called Sue Wat- 
kins to ask her permission to publish Conversations With Seth in two 
volumes; Sue's account of Jane's ESP classes is now too long for a single 
book. Actually, then, Sue finished Volume 1 while in Florida last month. 
Tam plans to have the first volume in the stores this October, and is 
scheduling Volume 2 for publication in January 1981. 

Jane has been feeling much better in recent days as far as her physical 
"symptoms" go; she's had some good spontaneous relaxation periods, and 
her walking has improved considerably. Her creative output also goes 
well. She's been working on "I Am Alive Again, " her longest poem for If 
We Live Again. When she lay down for a nap yesterday afternoon 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


237 


she picked up from Seth hints of subjects he's going to discuss in Dreams. 
"man migrations, " and "inside and outside cues" as pertaining to man's 
consciousness. She hopes Seth will go into that material tonight. This 
afternoon she finished typing her final version of Chapter 5 for God of 
Jane. 

Today I visited our optometrist — with results that Jane and I find most 
intriguing. 1 ) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening. ") 

Dictation. (Long pause.) At the time of this awakening man did 
experience, then, some sense of separation from his dream body, and 
from his own inner reality — the world of his dreams — but he was still 
far more aware of that subjective existence than you are now. 

The practical nature of his own dreams was also more apparent, for 
again, his dreams sent him precise visions as to where food might be 
located, for example, and for some centuries there were human 
migrations of a kind that now you see the geese make. All of those 
journeys followed literal paths that were given as information in the 
dream state. [But] more and more man began to identify himself with 
his exterior environment. He began to think of his inner ego almost as if 
it were a stranger to himself. It became his version of the soul, and 
there seemed to be a duality — a self who acted in the physical universe, 
and a separate spiritlike soul that acted in an immaterial world. 

This early man (and early woman) regarded the snake as the most 
sacred and basic, most secretive and most knowledgeable of all 
creatures. In that early experience it seemed, surely, that the snake was 
a living portion of the earth, rising from the bowels of the earth, rising 
from the hidden source of all earth gods. Men watched snakes emerge 
from their holes with wonder. The snake was then — in your terms, now 
(underlined) — both a feminine and masculine symbol. It seemed to 
come from the womb of the earth, and to possess the earth's secret 
wisdom. Yet also, in its extended form particularly, it was the symbol of 
the penis. It was important also in that it shed its skin, as man innately 
knew he shed his own bodies. 

(Pause at 9:31.) All units of consciousness, whatever their degree, 
possess purpose and intent. They are endowed with the desire for 
creativity, and to increase the quality of existence. 



238 


Jane Roberts 


They have the capacity to respond to multitudinous cues. There is a 
great elasticity for action and mobility, so that, for example, in man his 
conscious experience can actually be put together in an almost limitless 
number of ways. 

The inner and outer egos do not have a cementlike relationship, but 
can interrelate with each other in almost infinite fashions, still 
preserving the reality of physical experience, but varying the accents 
put upon it by the inner areas of subjective life. Even the bare-seeming 
facts of history are experienced far differently according to the 
symbolic content within which they are inevitably immersed. A war, in 
your terms, can be practically experienced as a murderous disaster, a 
triumph of savagery — or as a sublime victory of the human spirit over 
evil. 

(Long pause, then very intently:) We will return to the subject of war 
later on. I want to mention here, however, that man is not basically 
endowed with "warlike characteristics." He does not naturally murder. 
He does not naturally seek to destroy his own life or [the lives of] 
others. There is no battle for survival — but while you project such an 
idea upon natural reality, then you will read nature, and your own 
experiences with it, in that fashion. 

Man does have an instinct and a desire to live, and he has an instinct 
and a desire to die. The same applies to other creatures. In his life 
[each] man is embarked upon a cooperative venture with his own 
species, and with the other species, and dying he also in that regard acts 
in a cooperative manner, returning his physical substance to the earth. 
(Pause,) Physically speaking, man's "purpose" is to help enrich the 
quality of existence in all of its dimensions. Spiritually speaking, his 
"purpose" is to understand the qualities of love and creativity, to 
intellectually and psychically understand the sources of his being, and 
to lovingly create other dimensions of reality of which he is presently 
unaware. (Pause.) In his thinking, in the quality of his thoughts, in their 
motion, he is indeed experimenting with a unique and a new kind of 
reality, forming other subjective worlds which will in their turn grow 
into consciousness and song, which will in their turn flower from a 
dream dimension into other ones. Man is learning to create new worlds. 
In order to do so he has taken on many challenges. 

(Long pause.) You all have physical parents. Some of you have 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


239 


physical children as well — but you will all "one day'also be the mental 
parents of dream children who also waken in a new world, and look 
about them for the first time, feeling isolated and frightened and 
triumphant all at once. All worlds have an inner beginning. All of your 
dreams somewhere waken, but when they do they waken with the 
desire for creativity themselves, and they are bom of an innocent new 
intent. That which is in harmony with the universe, with All That Is, has 
a natural inborn impetus that will dissolve all impediments. It is easier, 
therefore, for nature to flourish than not. 

Take your break. 

(9:56 to 10:09.) 

You are aware of such activities now as automatic speaking and 
automatic writing, and of sleepwalking. These all give signs in modem 
times of some very important evidence in man's early relationship with 
the world and with himself. 

Sleepwalking was once, in that beginning, a very common ex- 
perience — far more so than now — in which the inner self actually 
taught the physical body to walk, and hence presented the newly 
emerged physically oriented intellect from getting in its own way, 
asking too many questions that might otherwise impede the body's 
smooth spontaneous motion. 

In the same fashion man is bom with an inbuilt propensity for 
language, and for the communication of symbols through pictures and 
writing. He spoke first in an automatic fashion that began in his dreams. 
In a fashion (underlined), you could almost say that he used language 
before he consciously understood it (quietly). It is not just that he 
learned by doing, but that the doing did the teaching. Again, lest there 
be a sharply inquiring intellect, wondering overmuch about how r the 
words were formed or what motions were necessary, his drawing was in 
the same way automatic. You might almost say — almost — that he used 
the language (pause) "despite himself." Therefore, it possessed an al- 
most magical quality, and the "word" was seen as coming directly from 
God. 

Give us a moment . . . Separately: 

(10:19. After giving the material I've excerpted for Note 1, Seth said 
good night at 10:30 p.m.) 



240 


Jane Roberts 


NOTE. Session 901 

1 . In a simplified account: When I was a youngster my mother took me 
to see our family optometrist. My parents had known him for years. 
With the best of intentions, that kindly gentleman put bifocals on me. 
They weren't very strong — but once the habit was set I wore glasses 
without protest for the next 40 years or so. It wasn't until Jane began 
coming through with the ideas embodied in the Seth material that I 
began to question my "need" for glasses. Without being concerned 
about what I was doing, I began to stop wearing them constantly. The 
glasses got in the way when I wrote and painted. I had to wear them 
when driving, though, because my driver's licence bore an "x" opposite 
"corrective lenses." Other than that, I usually put them on only when I 
felt tired. At the same time, I avoided giving myself the negative 
suggestion that my eyes still weren't perfect, even with my improving 
beliefs. 

Last week I received from our current optometrist (whom I'll call 
John Smith) his standard notice that two years have passed since my 
glasses were changed. I told myself to ignore it, yet began to feel a 
sense of strain whether or not I wore the glasses. I thought the power of 
suggestion was operating. Because of a cancellation I got a quick 
appointment to see John this afternoon — and received a very pleasant 
surprise, for his examination revealed that my vision has improved 
since the last prescription. The glasses I now have are getting to be too 
strong. Out of habit, I'd thought the opposite was the case. John too was 
surprised; he double-checked his figures to make sure he was right 
before ordering the weaker lenses. Once John had assembled his pher- 
opter, or lens unit, the test lenses making up the new prescription, my 
vision checked out at 20/15 — better than the so-called normal 20/20. 
That score is a considerable improvement over anything I'd ever 
achieved before, with or without glasses. 

Next, when he examined my eyes for glaucoma, John's tonometer 
gave readings that were midway in the normal range for eye tension, 
and a point or so better than they had been two years ago. "I'll take 
those," he exclaimed- "Nice and low." I felt a distinct lift of pleasure as 
I left his office. 

"I must be doing something right," I said to Jane as I explained the 
situation to her. And Seth addressed some very in- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


241 


teresting comments to me in the private portion of tonight's session: 

"You wanted some affirmation of your body's vitality, of its 
resilience and recuperative energies. You also wanted some reassurance 
that you could operate as an artist as long as you chose in this life. You 
used the incident of the optometrist's notice to give yourself a very fine 
lesson, for in the back of your mind you did indeed worry and wonder 
that your eyes were becoming tired. Under usual circumstances, those 
"symptoms" would be interpreted as signs of difficulty. You discovered 
instead that the so-called symptoms are signs that your glasses have 
become too strong because your eyesight has not simply held its own, 
but most remarkably improved, and in a way this is medically de- 
monstrable. 

"They [your eyes] have improved because you are indeed learning 
to relax about yourself more, and the improvement occurs first of all in 
that area of your main interest — your work — but it represents what is 
an overall time of regeneration. Your eyes do not exist alone in your 
head." 

(A note added later: On my last New York State Visual Acuity 
Report, which he filled out in May 1983, John Smith wrote that I 
passed the test for driving without wearing glasses [combined Snellen 
test score 20/30], However, when the postman delivered my new 
driver's license — good for four years — that "x" was still there opposite 
"corrective lenses." I haven't yet taken the time to straighten out that 
bureaucratic tangle.) 


SESSION 902— February 20, 1980 

9:08 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(Four months ago I wrote in Note 1 for Session 885 that through a 
series of misunderstandings the people at Ankh-Hermes, a publishing 
company in Holland, had violated their contract with Prentice-Hall by 
issuing a condensed translation of Seth Speaks. Our editor at Prentice- 
Hall, Tarn Mossman, insisted that Ankh-Hermes publish another, full- 
length edition of Jane's book in the Dutch language. Now Tarn has just 
forwarded to us correspondence showing that Ankh-Hermes will do this 
— the new publishing date for Seth Spreekt is still uncertain, however. 



242 


Jane Roberts 


Tonight, Seth suggested that "portions of this session can be appended 
to the book, " meaning Dreams, but I found it easier to offer most of his 
generalized material verbatim while eliminating his information on one 
of my dreams.) 

Now: a few remarks on the eye episode. 

You were presented — or rather you presented yourself — with a prime 
example of the abilities of the natural person. I said something once to 
the effect that so-called miracles were simply the result of nature 
unimpeded, and certainly that is the case. You are presented now, in the 
world, with a certain picture of a body and its activities, and that picture 
seems (underlined) very evidential. It seems to speak for itself. 

Instead you are presented, of course, with a picture of man's body as 
it reflects, and is affected by, man's beliefs. Doctors expect vision to 
[begin to] fail, for example, after the age of 30, and there are countless 
patient records that "prove" that such disintegration is indeed a 
biological fact. 

Your beliefs tell you, again, that the body is primarily a mechanism 
i — a most amazing machine, but a machine (louder), without its own 
purpose, without any intent, a mindless assembly plant of assorted parts 
that simply happened to grow together in a certain prescribed fashion. 
Science says that there is no will, yet it assigns to nature the will to 
survive — or rather, a will-less instinct to survive. To that extent it does 
admit (underlined) that the machine of the body "intends" to insure its 
own survival — but a survival which has no meaning beyond itself. And 
because [the body] is a machine, it is expected to decay after so much 
usage. 

In that picture consciousness has little part to play. In man's very 
early history, however, and in your term s for centuries after the 
"awakening," as described in our book, people lived in good health for 
much longer periods of time — and in certain cases they lived for 
several centuries. 1 No one had yet told them that this was impossible, 
for one thing. Their sense of wonder in the world, their sense of 
curiosity, creativity, and the vast areas of fresh mental and physical 
exploration, kept them alive and strong. For another thing, however, 
elders were highly necessary and respected for the information they had 
acquired about the world. They were needed. They taught the other 
generations. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


243 


In those times great age was a position of honor that brought along 
with it new responsibility and activity. The senses did not fade in their 
effectiveness, and it is quite possible biologically for all kinds of 
regenerations of that nature to occur. 

(To me:) You spoke today, or this evening, about some [world] 
statesmen who are not young at all, and men and women who do not 
only achieve (pause), but who open new horizons in their later years. 
They do so because of their private capacities, and also because they 
are answering the world's needs, and in ways that in many cases a 
younger person could not. 

In your society age has almost been considered a dishonorable state. 
Beliefs about the dishonor of age often cause people to make the 
decision — sometimes quite consciously — to bring their own lives to an 
end before the so-called threshold is reached. Whenever, however, the 
species needs the accumulated experience of its own older members, 
that situation is almost instantly reversed and people live longer. 

Some in your society feel that the young are kept out of life's 
mainstream also, denied purposeful work, their adolescence prolonged 
unnecessarily. As a consequence some young people die for the same 
reason: They believe that the state of youth is somehow dishonorable. 
They are cajoled, petted, treated like amusing pets sometimes, diverted 
with technology's offerings but not allowed to use their energy. There 
were many unfortunate misuses of the old system of having a son 
follow in his father's footsteps, yet the son at a young age was given 
meaningful work to do, and felt a part of life's mainstream. He was 
needed. 

(9:34.) The so-called youth culture, for all of its seeming 
(underlined) exaggerations of youth's beauty and accomplishments, 
actually ended up putting down youth, for few could live up to that 
picture. Often, then, both the young and the old felt left out of your 
culture. Both share also the possibility of accelerated creative vitality — 
activity that the elder great artists, or the elder great statesmen, have 
always picked up and used to magnify their own abilities. There comes 
a time when the experiences of the person in the world click together 
and form a new clearer focus, provide a new psychological framework 
from which his or her greatest capacities can emerge to form a new 
synthesis. But in your society many people never reach that 



244 


Jane Roberts 


point — or those who do are not recognized for their achievements in 
the proper way, or for the proper reasons. . . . 

Man's will to survive includes a sense of meaning and purpose, and a 
feeling for the quality (underlined) of life. You are indeed presented 
with an evidential picture that seems to suggest most vividly the "fact" 
of man's steady deterioration, and yet you are also presented with 
evidence to the contrary, even in your world, if you look for it. 

Your Olympics, 2 on television, present you with evidence of the great 
capacity of the young human body. The contrast between the activity of 
those athletes, however, and the activity of the normal young person is 
drastic. (Pause.) You believe that the greatest training and discipline 
must be used to bring about such activity — but that seemingly 
extraordinary physical ability simply represents the inherent capacities 
of the human body. In those cases, the athletes through training are 
finally able to give a glimpse of the body's spontaneous abilities. The 
training is necessary because it is believed necessary (all with 
emphasis). 

(9:53.) Again, in our material on suffering (see the 895th session, for 
instance), I mentioned that illness serves purposes — that it has a face- 
saving quality in your society — so here I am speaking of the body's own 
abilities. In that light, the senses do not fade. Age alone never brought 
about any loss of physical agility, or of mental ability, or of desire. 
Death must come to every living person, yet the time and the means are 
basically up to each individual. Meaningful work is important at any 
age. You cannot content the aged entirely with hobbies any more than 
you can the young, but meaningful work means work that also has the 
exuberance of play, and it is that playful quality that contains within 
itself great propensities of a healing and creative nature. 

In a fashion, now, your eyes improved their capacities, practically 
speaking, in a playful manner. The senses want to exceed themselves. 
They also leam "through experience." You have been painting more 
lately. Your eyes became more involved to that extent. Your eyes enjoy 
their part in that activity (intently), as the ears, say, enjoy hearing. It is 
their purpose. Your own desire to paint joined with and reinforced your 
eyes' natural desire to see. 

When [most of] you think of physical symptoms, of course, you 
regard your body with a deadly seriousness that to some 



Dreams. "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


245 


extent impedes inner spontaneity. You lay your limiting beliefs upon 
the natural person. 

Your dream 3 fits in here in its own fashion, for you see that the ship 
of life, so to speak, rides very swiftly and beautifully also beneath the 
conscious surface, traveling through the waters of the psyche. . . . You 
are progressing very well at under-the-sur-face levels. There were few 
impediments. You had clear sailing, so to speak, and the dream was 
indeed meant as an inner vision of your progress. 

(10:02.) Now, portions of this session can be appended to the book. 

("I was just going to ask you about doing that. " 

After discussing another dream of mine, Seth said good night at 10:11 
p.m. "I felt so relaxed before the session I was like a dishrag, " Jane said 
with a laugh. I told her the session was excellent, and that I'll be adding 
relevant parts of it to my dream notebook.) 


NOTES. Session 902 

1. Shades of the great ages given for those patriarchs in the Bible! That 
was my first thought when Seth told us that in ancient times certain 
people had "lived for several centuries." My second thought was to cut 
his statement out of this record entirely, so that Jane and I wouldn't 
have to contend with it at all. Jane wasn't upset by Seth's remark, and I 
could appreciate the humorous aspects of my own initial reactions — yet 
in all of the years he's been giving us material, Seth has never before 
made a reference to what seems like impossible longevities. 

I checked several Bibles, a Biblical almanac, and a Biblical 
dictionary. But one has only to read Chapter 5 of Genesis to learn what 
great ages are given to Adam and nine of his descendants up to Noah, 
or the time of the Flood. Did Adam really live for 930 years, or Seth, 
the third son of Adam and Eve, for 912? (Why isn't Eve's age given in 
the Bible?) Enoch, the fifth elder listed after Seth, lived for a mere 365 
years, but sired Methuselah, who at 969 years is the oldest individual 
recorded in the Bible. Methuselah was the father of Lamech (777 
years), who was the father of Noah (950 years). 

In Genesis 11, the listing of Abraham's ancestors begins after 



246 


Jane Roberts 


the Flood with the oldest son of Noah, Shem, living some 600 years. 
Generally, Abraham's forebears didn't live as long as Adam's 
descendants had, although after Shem their ages still ranged from 148 
years to 460. Abraham himself was "only" 175 years old at his death. 

During the little time we'd spent thinking about such matters, fane 
and I had considered the Biblical accounts of such great ages to be 
simply wrong, badly distorted, or perhaps epochal — that is, Abraham's 
ancestors may be listed in the correct genealogical sequence, but with 
many gaps among the individuals named. Also, a given father-son 
relationship may have actually been one between a father and a great- 
great-grandson, for example. There are other epochal lists in the Bible. 

Both of us thought that the long-lived individuals postulated by Seth 
had existed outside of the Biblical framework, however, and in truth far 
earlier historically. "Seth saying that makes perfect sense to me. It 
doesn't bother me," Jane said when I asked her what she thought of 
Seth's material. "You weren't encouraged to read the Bible even in 
Catholic grade school," she added. "We just didn't deal with it that 
much to worry about it. I never even read it through. ..." 

My questions about those ancient great ages led Seth to volunteer 
some more information in a couple of private sessions. 

First: "In those early days men and women did live to ages that 
would amaze you today — many living to be several hundred years old. 
This was indeed due to the fact that their knowledge was desperately 
needed, and their experience. They were held in veneration, and they 
cast their knowledge into songs and stories that were memorized 
throughout the years. Beside this, however, their energy was utilized in 
a different fashion than yours is: They alternated between the waking 
and dream states, and while asleep they did not age as quickly. Their 
bodily processes slowed. Although this was true, their dreaming mental 
processes did not slow down. There was a much greater communication 
in the dream state, so that some lessons were taught during dreams, 
while others were taught in the waking condition. There was a greater 
and greater body of knowledge to be transmitted as physical existence 
continued, for they did not transmit private knowledge only, but the 
entire body of knowledge that belonged to the group as a whole." 

Second: "The Bible is a conglomeration of parables and sto- 



Dreams, "Evolution,"' and Value Fulfillment 


247 


ries, intermixed with some unclear memories of much earlier times. 
The Bible that you recognize — or that is recognized — is not the first, 
however, but was compiled from several earlier ones as man tried to 
look back, so to speak, recount his past and predict his future. Such 
Bibles existed, not written down but carried orally, as mentioned some 
time ago, by the Speakers. It was only much later that this information 
was written down, and by then of course much had been forgotten. This 
is apart from the fact of tampering, or downright misinformation, as 
various factions used the material for their own ends." 

Seth first discussed the Speakers, and their oral traditions, in 
Session 558 for November 5, 1970. See the Appendix of Seth Speaks. 

2. The 13th Olympic Winter Games are being held at Lake Placid, New 
York. 

3. This account of the dream I had this afternoon (February 20, 1980) is 
condensed from my dream notebook: 

"In brilliant, limpid color: I dreamed that a ship — a freighter colored 
a warm gray and a rust-red-orange — sank in the ocean. I was 
underwater, to one side, and viewed everything as an observer. I 
watched the ship sink on an even keel through the blue-green water to 
the smooth yellow and tan and brown sandy ocean floor — but instead of 
settling motionless there the ship began to 'sail' or plow its way across 
the ocean bottom, almost as though it were a car moving along a road. I 
saw waves of sand gracefully rise up from the bow of the freighter. I 
saw no people or fish — just the ship, the ocean, and its floor, which was 
free of obstacles to the ship's easy passage. The fact that the ship could 
navigate that way underwater was a revelation to me, and I knew that in 
some way this boded well for my future. I was very pleased. The colors 
were beautiful. I'd really like to do a painting of this dream." 


SESSION 903— February 25, 1980 

9:16 p.m. MONDAY 


(As I type each session from my notes, I file it in one of two series of 
numbered three-ring binders. We're up to Volume 77 for the "regular" 



248 


Jane Roberts 


and book sessions, and Volume 22 for the private or "deleted" material. 
Here's the note Jane wrote this morning and inserted in Volume 77, 
where I'm keeping a few sheets of paper to record the next session: 
"Something from Seth over the weekend — only got a little — something 
about earth's grid of perception being so constructed that. . . . everything 
had to be created simultaneously or there would be 'holes' in the grid. " 

Then as we sat for the session Jane told me that after supper tonight 
she'd picked up material from Seth "that I wasn't sure of because I didn't 
understand what he meant. ..." Involved were her questions about 
mammals, species, subspecies, and other classifications of living crea- 
tures. I thought it obvious that her two latest intuitions from Seth were 
directly related — and that certain creative portions of her psyche never 
stopped "working. " Quickly I tried to explain that in biology the science 
of classification is called taxonomy. I had only a little success delineating 
terms like "phylum” and "genus, " since I didn't have a dictionary handy 
to refresh my own memory; however, I did help her understand that 
mammals aren't a subspecies of any other group, but are themselves a 
major class of warm-blooded creatures. 

In view of Jane's own limited knowledge of the scientific vocabulary 
man has devised to classify just the multitude of living forms alone on 
our planet, it's very interesting that Seth used what I think is the correct 
popular terminology as he went through the session. Even so, however, 
he still added meanings of his own to some of those basic categories, or 
taxa.) 

Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Dictation. (Pause.) The world as you know it exists as it does 
because you are yourself a living portion of a vast "conscious grid" of 
perception. 

Every c-e-1-1 (spelled), in those terms, is a sender and a receiver. All 
of the larger divisions of life — the mammals, fish, birds, and so forth — 
are an integral part of that living gridwork. The picture of the world is 
not ony the result of those messages transmitted and received, however, 
but is also caused by the relationships between those messages. In your 
terms, then (underlined), all of life's large classifications were present 
"at the beginning of the world." Otherwise there would have been vast 
holes in that grid of perception that makes possible the very sensations 
of physical life. 

In a manner of speaking (underlined), the physical universe is 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


249 


"transposed" upon another reality that must be its source. The world 
was and is created in dimensions outside of time, and outside of space 
as you understand it (intently). 

Other realities quite as legitimate as your own, quite as vital, quite as 
"real," coexist with your own, and in the terms of your understanding, 
"in the same space" — but of course in terms of your experience those 
spaces and realities would appear to be quite separate. No systems are 
closed, however, so that basically (underlined! the living grid of 
perception that causes one world or reality is also "wired into" all other 
such systems. There is a give-and-take between them. 

(Pause at 9:30 in an intent delivery.) The grids of perception that 
compose your world give you the world picture as you (underlined) 
experience it because your physical senses put you in a certain position 
within the entire grid. Animals, for example, while part of your 
experience, are also "tuned into" that grid at another level. The large 
classifications of mammals, fish, birds, men, reptiles, plants, and so 
forth, are [each] an integral part of that larger perceptive pattern — and 
that pattern (underlined) in those terms had to be complete even in the 
beginning of your time. 

(9:35. As he's taken to doing lately, our cat Billy jumped up on the 
couch and ensconced himself in a hall tight against my left elbow as I 
took Jane's dictation.) 

In various periods that "gridwork" might "carry more traffic" along 
certain circuits than at other periods, so that there has been some 
creative leeway allowed, particularly on the parts of the species that 
make up your larger classifications. There were always birds, for 
example, but in the great interplay of "interior" and exterior 
communication among all portions of this vast living system, there was 
a creative interplay that allowed for endless variations within that 
classification, and each other one. 

Your technological communication system is a conscious construct 
— a magnificent one — but one that is based upon your innate 
knowledge of the inner, cellular communication between all species. 
Saying that, I am not robbing the intellect of its right to congratulate 
itself upon that technology. 

(9:42.) The large classifications of life give you the patterns into 
which consciousness forms itself, and because those patterns seem 
relatively stable it is easy to miss the fact that they are filled 



250 


Jane Roberts 


out, so to speak, in each moment with new energy. Man does not in his 
physical development pass through the stages supposedly followed by 
the hypothetical creature who left the water for the land to become a 
mammal — but each species does indeed have written within it the 
knowledge of "its past." Part of this, again, is most difficult to express, 
and I must try to fill out old words with new meanings. (Pause.) The 
reincamationai aspects of physical life, however, serve a very important 
purpose, providing an inner subjective background. Such a background 
is needed by every species. 

Reincarnation exists, then, on the part of all species. Once a 
consciousness, however, has chosen the larger classification of its 
physical existences, it stays within that framework in its "reincar- 
nationai" existences. Mammals return as mammals, for example, but 
the species can change within that classification . 1 This provides great 
genetic strength, and consciousnesses in those classifications have 
chosen them because of their own propensities and purposes. The 
animals, for example, seem to have a limited range of physical activity 
in conscious terms, as you think of them. An animal ca nn ot decide to 
read a newspaper. Newspapers are outside of its reality. An im a ls have a 
much wider range, practically speaking, in certain other areas. They are 
much more intimately aware of their environment, of themselves as 
separate from it, but also of themselves as a part of it (intently). In that 
regard, their experience deals with relationships of another kind. 

(Now Jane paused several times in her delivery — and I had the feeling 
that Seth was groping for the words that would make his meaning as 
clear to us as possible.) 

These grids of perception "do not exist forever" in your dimension of 
time, for your dimension of time cannot hold anything that is outside it. 
Once a world exists, however, it becomes imprinted or stamped upon 
eternity, so that it exists in time and out of it "at once." 

When you ask: "When did the world begin?" or "What really 
happened?" or "Was there a Garden of Eden?", you are referring to the 
world as you understand it, but in those terms there were earths in the 
same space before the earth you recognize existed , 2 and they began in 
the manner that I have given you in the early chapters of this book. The 
patterns for worlds — the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


251 


patterns — continue in your time dimension, though in that time 
dimension those worlds must disappear, again, to continue "their 
existence outside of time." The patterns are filled out again. 

(10:03.) In the case of earth the grid of perception is simply used 
differently, certain areas becoming prominent in some eras, and less 
prominent in others. Using your idea of time, I can only say that when 
the entire gestalt of consciousnesses that formed a particular earth have 
formed its reality to the best of their abilities, fulfilling their individual 
and mass capacities as far as possible, then they lovingly turn over that 
grid to others, and continue to take part in existences that are not 
physical in your terms. And that has happened many times. 

Your tale about the Garden of Eden, then, is a legend about earth's 
last beginning. Each world is so cunningly constructed, again, that each 
consciousness, regardless of its degree, plays a vital part. And each of 
your actions, however inconsequential, becomes connected in one way 
or another — in one way or another — to each other reality and each 
other world (all with much emphasis). 

Now in a manner of speaking — though I see that little time has 
passed in this living room where I speak with Ruburf s permission — we 
have transcended time to some extent this evening, for in what I have 
said there are indeed hints and illusions — cadences — that can, if you 
are ready, give you a feeling for existence as it is outside of time's 
context. Even to try and verbally present such material necessitates 
alterations involving perception, for while that gridwork appears quite 
stable to your senses, giving you a reliable picture of reality, this is also 
because you have trained yourselves to pick up certain signals only. 
Others at other levels are (underlined) available. You can (underlined) 
tune into cellular consciousness, for example. 

Since this material must be comprehensible, Ruburt and I together 
form our own pathway of perceptions — he from his end and me from 
mine, so that we thread back and forth as if ('underlined) through the 
wiring of some vast computer — but a computer that is alive. 

(10:18.) End of dictation. End of session, unless you have a question. 

("In a session I'm working with now for Mass Events — the 83 7th, 



252 


Jane Roberts 


about the death of our cat, Billy One, a year ago — you said there wasn't any 
such thing as a cat consciousness, per se. " 3 Seth nodded. "Tonight's session 
reminds me of that one. I see how they fit together") 

They do indeed. Billy can be as he chooses — reincarnated into any species 
within his classification — as a mammal. 

("That isn't going to run into the idea of transmigration, is it?" I was 
thinking that man in also a mammal.) 

That is something else — that is, men being bom as animals. I am including 
man as his own classification. Remember, however, there are also fragments, 
which [again] is something else. 4 

("Last Saturday morning I had what seemed to be two dreams that were 
identical and side by side, or at the same time. But they weren't within the 
other, as in a double dream — ") 

You know you can have more than one dream at a time. You can also 
experience versions of dreams of probable selves, but there will always be 
some point of contact — that is, there will always be a reason why you pick up 
such a dream. All of the dreams people have form a mass dream framework. 
Dreams exist at other levels, and physically of course they affect the body 
state. In such ways, the world's actions are worked out in mass dream 
communications that are at the same time public and private. 

The country works out national concerns in that fashion. You think when 
you are asleep as well as when you are awake. But when you are asleep your 
thoughts have a richer dimensional cast: They are fattened by symbols and 
images. 

End of session, and a fond good evening. 

("Thank you very much. Good night. ") 

(10:25 p.m. "Gee, I have the feeling that we had a fantastic session, " Jane 
enthused once she'd quickly left her trance state. I agreed. "I'm really making 
an effort to free myself from what science believes about evolution, or anything 
like that, " she said. "That's what I got before the session — about animals 
reincarnating — and I thought: Oh, no. But it worked out okay. " Neither of us 
could remember Seth stating flat out in any of his material that animals 
reincarnate, although he may have done so. "After all of this time," Jane 
mused, "he says that. ..." 

Condensed from my entry in my dream notebook for last Saturday morning, 
February 23, 1980: 

"In color as usual: I can recall hardly any of these, but Jane suggested I 
write down what I can. 1 had two dreams, side by side. I believe they 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


253 


were identical to each other, with the same people in each one and the 
same resolution: a decision I reached in a new house on a hillside. 
Involved was a male character in a well-known TV program. We saw 
the show last night. I'm puzzling over how I could have had the dreams 
beside each other, though; it seems they should have been in sequence. I 
had no sense of one dream being inside the other one, as in what I call 
the conventional double dream. ") 


NOTES. Session 903 

1. Seth is telling us a great deal here, on a subject Jane and I 
have done little to explore with him. We'd like to know much 
more. Mammals are animals of the highest class of warm 
blooded vertebrates, the Mammalia. They are usually hairy, and 
their young are fed with milk secreted by the female. Dogs, cats, 
manatees, lions, dolphins, apes, bats, whales, shrews, sloths, and 
deer are mammals, to name just a few. I'm interpreting Seth to 
say that a consciousness can choose to range among such forms. 
However, for reasons to be hinted at later in the session, the 
primate man (who is also a mammal) falls outside of Seth's 
meaning here. 

I found the scientific, systematic categorization of organisms to be 
fascinating. For man alone the arrangement goes in this descending 
order from the most inclusive: The kingdom Animalia; phylum 
Chordata; class Mammalia; order Primates; family Hominidae; genus 
Homo; species name Homo sapiens; common name Man. 

2. Seth has told us almost from the beginning of the sessions 
that in our terms the earth we know is but the latest in a series 
of earths that have existed in the same "space," or "value climate 
of psychological reality." According to Seth, however, much 
more is involved. From Session 29, for February 26, 1964 (just 
16 years ago): "There are endless planes upon your earth, or 
rather endless planes occurring simultaneously with your earth. 
Your solid earth is not a solid to inhabitants that would seem to 
take up the same space as your earth. The idea of taking up the 
same space is erroneous to begin with, but I don't see how we 
can avoid such terms and still make any sense to you." 



254 


Jane Roberts 


Jane and I, and Seth, hadn't cared for the trite term, "plane," even 
then. "The value climate of psychological reality" is one of Seth's 
attempts to originate something better. See Appendix 8 for Volume 1 of 
"Unknown " Reality. 

3.1'm quoting portions from that 837th session in Note 2 for Session 
840, in Chapter 6 of Mass Events. 

4.Jane and I had always thought of transmigration (or metempsychosis) 
as meaning the birth of a human soul in just animal form. Actually, 
however, the term refers to the journey of the soul into any form, 
whether human, animal, or inanimate — thus differing from the ordinary 
doctrine of reincarnation, or rebirth into the same species. Various 
interpretations of transmigration are ancient in many cultures. Seth, in 
Session 705 for June 24, 1975, in Volume 2 of "Unknown" Reality: 
"There is no transmigration of souls, in which the entire personality of a 
person 'comes back' as an animal. Yet in the physical framework there is 
a constant intermixing, so that the [molecular components of the] cells 
of a man or woman may become the cells of a plant or an animal, and of 
course vice versa." In Note 2 for Session 840, in Mass Events, I'm 
quoting Seth from the 838th session for March 5, 1979: "I want to avoid 
tales of the transmigration of the souls of men to animals, say — a badly 
distorted version of something else entirely." 

In the 4th session for December 8, 1963, the personality Jane and I 
had been contacting through the Ouija board, Fra nk Withers, spelled 
out with the board's pointer the message that he preferred to be called 
Seth — and Seth it's been ever since. Shortly before he announced 
himself as Seth, I'd asked Frank Withers if people were ever "reborn as 
animals." His answer was as direct as possible: "No." Next I asked him: 
"Is part of your psyche alive on earth now?" The answer was very 
strange to us at the time: "Very small part. I hardly miss it. I watch it 
but I leave it alone. It is a dog fragment." Frank Withers would not give 
us the location of this dog: "No." 

Jane gave her first spoken answer for Seth early in the 8th session 
for December 15. Although she was by then receiving quick mental 
answers to many of our questions in the sessions, often she was still 
cautiously verifying those responses by having at least their beginnings 
spelled out letter by letter upon the 



Dreams, "Evolution/and Value Fulfillment 


255 


board. (I'd started writing down everything in the very first session.) 

In that 8th session Seth gave us more material on fragments: "In 
some submerged manner all fragments of a personality exist within an 
entity, with their own individual consciousnesses. They are not aware 
of the entity itself. . . . The entity operates its fragments in what you 
would call a subconscious manner, that is, without conscious direction. 
The entity gives the fragments independent life, then more or less 
forgets them. . . . Even thoughts, for instance, are fragments, though on 
a different plane." Then Jane dictated a key sentence: "Fragments of an- 
other sort, called personality fragments, operate independently, though 
under the auspices of the entity." 

When I asked him in the same session about his evocative use of 
"fragment," Seth replied: "That is an original term with me, as far as I 
know." Within another couple of sessions, however, he began to let 
"fragment" semantically yield to other terminology as he continued 
developing his material in ever-deepening discussions of personalities 
and entities, reincarnation, time, dreams, and other related subjectes. I 
was surprised when he returned to the word here in Dreams. I've 
designed this note to supplement Jane's writing on fragments in The 
Seth Material, which Prentice-Hall published in 1970. 

Some years after the 4th session was held, and without telling us 
anything else about the subject, Seth volunteered the information that 
his dog fragment had died. We haven't tried to pursue the matter with 
him. 


SESSION 904— February 27, 1980 

8:54 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(Jane called me at 8:15 for the session, but it was 8:50 before we 
actually sat for it. She wanted to start early because she was so relaxed: 
"Come on, Seth, if you want a session you'd better bail me out, " she 
laughed. "But 1 feel him around. . . .") 

Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

( With a smile.) Dictation. 



256 


Jane Roberts 


("Good.") 

Now. (Pause.) The emergence of action within a time scheme is 
actually one of the most important developments connected with the 
beginning of your world. 

The Garden of Eden story in its most basic sense refers to man's 
sudden realization that now he must act within time . His experiences 
must be neurologically structured. This immediately brought about the 
importance of choosing between one action and another, and made acts 
of decision highly important. 

This time reference is perhaps the most important within earth 
experience, and the one that most influences all creatures. In experience 
or existence outside of time (pause), there is no necessity to make 
certain kinds of judgments. In an out-of-time reference, theoretically 
speaking now, an infinite number of directions can be followed at once. 
Earth's time reference, however, brought to experience a new brilliant 
focus — and in the press of time, again, certain activities would be 
relatively more necessary than others, relatively more pleasant or 
unpleasant than others. Among a larger variety of possible actions, man 
was suddenly faced with a need to make choices, that within that 
context had not been made "before." 

(9:02.) Speaking in terms of your time, early man still had a greater 
neurological leeway. There were alternate neurological pathways that, 
practically speaking, were more available then than now. They still 
exist now, but they have become like ghostly signals in the background 
of neurological activity. 

(Jane paused, eyes closed, often seeming to grope for words while in 
trance.) This is, again, difficult to explain, but free will operates in all 
units of consciousness, regardless of their degree — but (whispering) it 
operates within the fra mework of that degree. Man possesses free will, 
but that free will operates only within man's degree — that is, his free 
will is somewhat contained by the frameworks of time and space. 

He has free will to make any decisions that he is able to make 
(intently). This means that his free will is contained, given meaning, 
focused, and framed by his neurological structure. He can only move, 
and he can only choose therefore to move, physically speaking, in 
certain directions in space and time. That time reference, however, 
gives (underlined) his free will meaning and a context in which to 
operate. We arc speaking now of conscious decisions as you think of 
them. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment. 


257 


(Long pause.) You can only make so many conscious decisions, or 
you would be swamped and caught in a constant dilemma of decision 
making. Time organizes the available choices that are to be made. The 
awakening mentioned earlier, then, found man rousing from his initial 
"dreaming condition," faced suddenly with the need for action in a 
world of space and time, a world in which choices became inevitable, a 
world in which he must choose among probable actions — and from an 
infinite variety of those choose which events he would physically 
actualize. This would be an almost impossible situation were the 
species — meaning each species — not given its own avenues of 
expression and activity, so that it is easier for certain species to behave 
in certain manners. And each species has its own overall characteristics 
and propensities that further help it define the sphere of influence in 
which it will exert its ability to make choices. 

(9:17.) Each species is endowed also, by virtue of the units of 
consciousness that compose it, with an overall inner picture of the 
condition of each other species (pause), and further characterized by 
basic impulses so that it is guided toward choices that best fulfill its 
own potentials for development while adding to the overall good of the 
entire world consciousness. This does not curtail free will any more 
than man's free will is curtailed because he must (underlined) grow 
from a fetus into an adult instead of the other way around. 

The differences among all species are caused by this kind of 
organization, so that areas of choice are clearly drawn, and areas of free 
activity clearly specified. The entire gestalt of probable actions, 
therefore, is already focused to some degree in the species' 
differentiations. In the vast structure of probable activity, however, far 
more differentiation was still necessary, and this is provided for through 
the inner passageways of reincamational existence. 

Each person, for example, is bom with his or her uniquely individual 
set of characteristics and abilities, likes and dislikes. Those serve to 
organize individual action in a world where an infinite number of 
probable roads are open — and here again, private impulses are basically 
meant to guide each individual toward avenues of expression and 
probable activities suited best to his or her development. They are 
meant, therefore, as aids to help organize action (pause), and to set free 
will more effectively 



258 


Jane Roberts 


into motion. Otherwise, free will would be almost inoperble in practical 
terms: Individuals would be faced by so many choices that any 
decisions would be nearly impossible. Essentially, the individual would 
have no particular leaning toward any one action over any other (all 
with emphasis). 

"By the time" that the Garden of Eden tale reached your biblical 
stories, the entire picture had already been seen in the light of concepts 
about good and evil that actually appeared, in those terms, a long time 
later in man's development. The inner rein-camational structure of the 
human psyche is very important in man's physical survival. Children — 
change that to "infants" — dream of their past lives, remembering, for 
example, how to walk and talk. They are bom with the knowledge of 
how to think, with the propensity for language. They are guided by 
memories that they later forget. 

In time's reference, the private purposes of each individual appear 
also in the larger historical context, so that each person forms his comer 
of his civilization — and all individuals within a given time period have 
private and overall purposes, challenges that are set, probable actions 
that they will try to place within history's context. 

(Long pause at 9:37.) Give us a moment. . . . 

(Long pause.) End of dictation. Do you have a question? 

(My mind seemed to be a blank. I tried to think for a few moments, 
then shook my head.) 

Then I bid you a fond good evening. My heartiest regards to you 
both. 

("Thank you, Seth. Good night. ") 

(9:39 p.m. "Before the session, I knew he was going to talk about the 
Garden of Eden, choices, and reincarnation, "Jane said. "I felt this great 
big block of information, and again I felt it was shattering, that he broke 
through doors once more. I really got the best I could get, or whatever. 
Do you know what I mean ? " 

Before I could answer: "Jesus, that was short, though, " Jane said as 
she looked at the clock. The session had lasted 45 minutes. "I feel like 
I've been gone five centuries' worth. I could have been to the moon. I 
think I've got psychological jet leg, " she said — a great phrase. "Thai's 
weird. You can't believe the time when you get back, sometimes, but you 
couldn't have gotten the information any other way. I feel it's good, 
anyway. . . .") 



CHAPTER 


Genetic Heritage and 

Reincamational 

Predilections 


6 


SESSION 905— March 3, 1980 

9:27 p.m. MONDAY 

(Last Saturday evening Jane and I met here at the hill house with a 
group of people who used to attend Jane's old ESP class. One of those 
former students, who now lives out of town, had a rather heavy cold — 
and now I think that for the first time in many years we too may be 
developing colds. Or something! 

This little session is almost book dictation. I'm also presenting it 
because it shows how an event on one day of our lives — a television 
program — influenced Jane's delivery of one session of the Seth material. 
Other factors are involved, of course, as they always must be, and I refer 
to one of those at the end of the session. 

Jane was very relaxed after supper. When I got out to the living room 
to wait for the session, I found her watching one of those fascinating, 
multiple-subject science programs on the educational channel: Various 
experts were discussing topics like childbirth and sound, Kirlian photog- 
raphy, astronomy, particle physics, and so forth. After the program ended 
at 9:00 1 explained to Jane out of my own limited knowledge how particle 



260 


Jane Roberts 


accelerators — "atom smashers" — work. She partially grasped what I told 
her. I suggested quickly showing her an article I'd recently filed on the 
subject, but she didn 't want to see it. 

"I don't think I should have watched that program," she said. "It's 
driven everything else, out of my mind. I don't feel Seth around or 
anything. " And: "I don't know whether I can have a session or not. " I 
asked her to go back into her relaxed state. "Well, I vaguely feel him 
around, " she finally said at 9:19. 

"Probably he's just getting back from the nearest galaxy, " I joked. 

"No, it's just that before that program I felt he had a lot of complicated 
material to give, and I couldn't get it afterward," Jane replied. We 
continued to wait. At 9:23: "Now I can tell he's got a new chapter 
heading. ... I hope he comes through with something. I feel awfully 
funny. Actually, I feel like I'm in a trance, " Jane said with unwitting 
humor, "but not the right one. ..." And it developed that she never had 
had a session quite like this one.) 

Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Now. (Pause, then quietly:) We have been trying to form some kind 
of a neurological bridge in order to convey some particularly pertinent 
material for our book. This is the cause of Ruburt's sense of 
disorientation. 

He did pick up our next chapter heading (six): "Genetic Heritage and 
Reincamational Predilections," and I am trying to give him this other 
material at different levels. Then later it will indeed be translated into 
suitable English sentences. 

We are also dealing with probabilities, and the information has to do 
with those data you finally accept as physical experience, why you 
accept it, where it comes from, and where those events "go" that you do 
not experience. All of this is connected with the genetic information 
that any individual receives from the biological bank that belongs to the 
species at large, and from the inner reincamational bank. 1 We will see 
that Ruburt receives the information that he needs at the necessary 
levels, so that the material can be verbalized. All of this is also 
intimately connected with those areas in which free will can be utilized, 
freely, to turn probable events into physically perceived ones. 

I am coming through now simply to give you this explanation. On 
his own levels also, Ruburt is (underlined) undergoing rather 
accelerated healing processes — you might say at microscopic levels. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


261 


One point before I close for this evening: He was quite correct in his 
interpretation as he watched your expression one evening while you 
slept — and it was no coincidence that he awakened to see it. You were 
deeply involved in overall healing processes of your own, in which 
certain comprehensions on your part were conveyed to the various 
organs of your body, so that your body came into a far better overall 
relationship. That relationship was also responsible for [your] eye 
improvements, and Ruburt was able to perceive differences in you 
before you were aware of them at all. 

Ruburt's sense of disorientation is also partially the result of healing 
processes within his own body, and altering relationships — again, at 
intimate microscopic levels — which send their new "healing tremors" 
upward through the various formations of matter, so tell him to enjoy it. 

End of session. 

("Thank you, Seth. Good night. ") 

(9:42 p.m. Seth's references to my facial changes while sleeping 
touched upon a subject Jane and I had meant to ask him about several 
times; she'd referred to it again today. My eye improvements had been 
"officially" verified by our optometrist, John Smith, on February 18. [See 
Note 1 for Session 901.] A few nights before that, Jane had awakened 
and turned on her table light, sitting up in bed to have a cigarette as she 
sometimes does. She'd noticed my expression as I lay sleeping on my back: 
"One of bliss, almost, though I don't like the word, and it's not the right 
one anyhow, " she told me the next morning. "But I've seen you sleeping 
before, and I knew the difference. 

"It was almost as if you were being reborn, "she laughed after tonight's 
session. "When the Barbers were here the other night with their baby, I 
saw something like the same thing on the baby's face — only yours was 
like the adult knowing version of that — you know what I mean? " 

I could only reply this evening — as I had at the time — that I was glad 
she'd had her perception, but that consciously I hadn't been aware of any 
bodily changes. Neither of us had connected my subsequent eye improve- 
ments with her insight, although perhaps we should have. But such 
associations aren't nearly as easy to foresee as they are to understand in 
retrospect. 

I now reminded Jane that John Smith had knocked on our back door 
at suppertime tonight. She exclaimed in surprise: She'd consciously for- 
gotten that event, for she hadn't seen John as I briefly talked with him on 
the back porch. He'd stopped by on his way home to give me my old lenses. 



262 


Jane Roberts 


since he'd forgotten to do so at his office four days ago, when I'd had 
them replaced in my favorite old frames by the new, weaker lenses. I told 
Jane I felt that regardless of John's evocative visit Seth would have 
mentioned my eye phenomena tonight, given his subject matter for the 
session. And yet, I added, because of the very nature of the Seth material, 
I'm also bound to think that beneath that simplified explanation there are 
"deeper" connections — in which the television program, her reactions 
to it, John's appearance, and tonight's session are all related. Jane 
agreed.) 


NOTE. Session 905 

1 . Genes are elemental units arranged along the threadlike 
chromosomes in the nucleus of each cell, and transmit hereditary 
characteristics to following generations of animals and plants. The gene 
is primarily made up of protein and a twisted double strand or helix of 
DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid. Each gene occurs at a specific location 
on a chromosome. We humans, for instance, have 46 chromosomes and 
an estimated 100,000 genes in each cell, and our genes provide the 
blueprints for the synthesis of some 50,000 proteins. I'm sure that our 
wonder at the vast organization of nature will continue to grow as our 
scientists plunge ever deeper into the complexities of genetic research. 
And what about the philosophical questions involving free will in all of 
this? Just how much real freedom do we have, if all is programmed by 
our genetic heritage? (I ask the question aside from the old, still-extant 
arguments within philosophy, psychology, and religion over whether 
free will has ever existed — or does — in any context. In addition, now 
we also have many newer questions about inherited genetic equality 
and/or inequality!) 

For that matter, one can ask the same questions about our supposed 
reincamational heritage: Just how much free will does that concept 
leave us? Are we as fated to dance to unknown and unrealized 
nonphysical reincamational events, tendencies, and goals, as we are to 
the physical, genetic ones — that is, do the two operate together? How 
immutable, or resistant to change, are those two endowments, and what 
parts of either one can we turn off if we choose to? Will the dissection 
of a gene, down even to 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


263 


its atomic components, ever yield reincamational clues? In Mass 
Events Seth told us: "Consciousness forms the genes, and not the other 
way around, and the about-to-be-bom infant is the agency that adds 
new material through the chromosomal structure." In Chapter 4, see 
Session 827 for March 13, 1978. 


SESSION 906— March 6, 1980 

8:52 p.m. THURSDAY 

(Jane and I do have colds — -full-blown ones, evidently picked up from 
one of our visitors last Saturday evening. We didn 't hold our regularly 
scheduled session last night because we felt so miserable. Literally, we 
cannot remember the last time either one of us had a cold. 

This afternoon Jane said she'd learned from Seth that we'd come down 
with those indispositions because we wanted to use our bodies' immune 
systems; those structures needed the workouts, in other words. I'd had a 
vaguely similar thought this morning, and it had reminded me of my 
feelings on Saturday night — that our friend's continual sneezing amid 
the group was actually a prolonged act of aggression. 

"I've been getting some fascinating stuff, " Jane said as she did the 
supper dishes. "It comes and goes. I suppose I'll try to have a session 
tonight, if my voice holds out. Besides, I'm bored, sitting around watch- 
ing TV all night. A couple of nights of that are enough. ..." 

Tonight's session isn't book dictation, but the large portions of it I'm 
presenting convey useful insights into our social behavior and social 
health — and as I show in Note 1, those states can include our interac- 
tions with animals. 

When Jane began the session her voice was a bit rough and very quiet, 
but by listening closely I could understand Seth well enough.) 

Now. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Subject: Viruses as part of the body's overall health system, and 
viruses as biological statements. 

Viruses serve many purposes, as I have said before. 1 The body- 
contains all kinds of viruses, including those considered deadly, but 
those are usually not only harmless, or inactive, but beneficial to the 
body's overall balance. 

The body maintains its vitality not only through the physical 



264 


Jane Roberts 


motion and agility that you perceive, but by microscopic agility, and 
actions within microseconds, that you do not perceive. There is as 
much motion, stimulation, and reaction in the interior bodily 
environment as the body meets through its encounters with the exterior 
environment. The body must now and then "flush its systems out," run 
through its repertoire, raise its temperature (pause), activate its 
hormonal actions more strongly. In such ways it keeps its system of 
immunities clear. That system operates always. To some extent, it is a 
way that the body distinguishes between self and nonself. 

(9:01.) In certain fashions (underlined), that system also keeps the 
body from squandering its energies, preserving biological integrity. 
Otherwise it would be as if you did not know where your own house 
began or ended, and so tried to heat the entire neighborhood. So some 
indispositions "caused by viruses" are accepted by the body as 
welcome triggers, to clean out that system, and this applies to your 
present indispositions. 

More is always involved, however, for those viruses that you 
consider communicable do indeed in one way or another represent 
communications on a biological level. They are biological statements, 
literally social communications, biologically made, and they can be of 
many kinds. 

(Still quietly, but at a good pace:) When a skunk is frightened, it 
throws off a foul odor indeed, and when people are frightened they 
react in somewhat the same fashion at times, biologically reacting to 
stimuli in the environment that they consider alarming. They throw off 
a barrage of "foul viruses" — that is, they actually collect and mobilize 
from within their own bodies viruses that are potentially harmful, 
biologically trigger these, or activate them, and send them out into the 
environment in self-protection, to ward off the enemy (more 
vigorously). 

In a fashion this is a kind of biological aggression. The viruses, 
however, also represent tensions that the person involved is getting rid 
of. That is one kind of statement. It is often used in a very strong 
manner in times of war, or great social upheaval, when people feel 
frightened. 

Now, your friend had been to the Olympics (last month, at Lake 
Placid, New York), and he was charged by the great physical vitality 
that he felt watching that athletic panorama. [Because of that, and for 
other personal reasons], he could find no release for the 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


265 


intense energy he felt, so he got rid of it, protected himself, and threw 
out his threatening biological posture: the viruses. 

(With a smile:) Your bodies had not received any such goodies in 
some time, so they exuberantly used them as triggers to regenerate the 
immune systems. 

Many people had such reactions as your friend's, coming from the 
Olympics, in that they did not know how to use and release their own 
energies — as if they themselves felt put in an inferior position in 
comparison to such achievements. 

(Pause at 9:17.) There are all kinds of biological reactions between 
bodies that go unnoticed, and they are all basically of a social nature, 
dealing with biological communications. In a fashion viruses — in a 
fashion — again, are a way of dealing with or controlling the 
environment. These are natural interactions, and since you live in a 
world where, overall, people are healthy enough to contribute through 
labor, energy, and ideas, health is the dominating ingredient — but there 
are biological interactions between all physical bodies that are the basis 
for that health, and the mechanisms include the interactions of viruses, 
and even the periods of indisposition, that are not understood. 

All of this has to do with man's intent and his understanding. The 
same relationships, however, do not only exist between human bodies, 
of course, but between man and the animals and the plants in the 
environment, and is part of the unending biological communication that 
overall produces the vitality of physical experience. 

One note to Ruburt on vitamins: They are most effectively used for 
periods of two or three weeks, where they act as stimuli and reminders 
to the body. Then drop their use for two or three weeks, so that the body 
then produces by itself those elements you have reminded it you want. 
Any steady use of vitamins is not to your overall benefit, for you give 
the body what it needs too easily, and its ability to produce such 
material on its own becomes sluggish. Do vou follow me? 

("Yes.") 

(9:27.) Give us a moment. . . . Certain "diseases" are protections 
against other diseases, and the body on its own is its own excellent 
regulator. 

Obviously those abilities operate best when you trust them. The 
body's systems know what diseases are in the air, so to 



266 


Jane Roberts 


speak, and will often set up countermeasures ahead of time, giving you 
what you experience as an indisposition of one kind or another — but an 
indisposition that is actually a statement of prevention against another 
condition. 

There is great traffic flow in a city: A body knows how to leap out of 
the way in a moment's time from an approaching car. In the interior 
physical environment there is far greater traffic flow. There are 
decisions made in periods of time so brief you cannot imagine them — 
reactions that are almost over before they begin, reactions so fast you 
cannot perceive them as the body responds to its inner reality, and to all 
the stimuli from the exterior environment. The body is an open system. 
As solid as it seems to you, there are constant chemical reactions 
between it and the world, electromagnetic adjustments, alterations of 
balance, changes of relationships — alterations that occur between the 
body and its relationship with every other physical event, from the 
position of the planets and moon and the sun, to the position of the 
smallest grain of sand, to the tiniest microbe in anyone's intestine 
(intently). 

All of those adjustments are made without your conscious notice, 
and yet fit in with your overall purposes and intents. 

End of session. 

("Thank you, Seth. That was very good. Good night. ") 

My fondest regards to each of you. 

(9:35 p.m. "Jesus, I didn't know whether I could do it or not, " Jane 
said, "but I felt all that stuff there in a great big block, and I just had to 
get it out. I like it when I do that. I also like it when I don't have to. " So 
once again I'd seen it happen: Jane had done very well with a session 
when she'd felt poorly beforehand. Although her voice had remained 
muted, her delivery had increased in vigor and emphasis as the session 
progressed. It was as though she'd acquired an infusion of energy from 
Seth — yet once the session was over she announced that she wanted to go 
to bed.) 


MOTE. Session 906 

1. Seth first mentioned viruses in the 17th session for January 26, 1964, 
when I asked him to comment upon the recent deaths of our dog, 
Mischa, at the age of 1 1 , and of a pair of kittens Jane 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


267 


had obtained from the janitor of the art gallery where she worked part 
time. (The kittens had the same mother, but had come from successive 
litters.) I was 44 and Jane was 34, and in conventional terms both of us 
were still struggling — not only to leam about ourselves and the world, 
but to find our creative ways in that world. Seth's answer to my 
question was more than a little surprising and saddening to us, and 
opened up a number of insights: 

"The particular atmosphere surrounding your personalities just prior 
to the animals' deaths was destructive, short-circuited, and filled with 
inner panics. I do not want to hurt your feelings. That is, I am sorry to 
say, a natural occurrence on your plane. The fact is that the animals 
caught your emotional contagion, and according to their lesser abilities 
translated it for themselves. 

"The viruses and infections were of course present. They always 
are. They are themselves fragments, struggling small fragments without 
intention of harm. You have general immunity, believe it or not, to all 
such viruses and infections. Ideally, you can inhabit a plane with them 
without fear. It is only when you give tacit agreement that harm is 
inflicted upon you by these fragments. To some degree, lesser, 
dependent lives such as household pets are dependent upon your 
psychic strength. They have their own, it is true, but unknowingly you 
reinforce their energy and health. 

"When your own personalities are more or less in balance, you have 
no trouble at all in looking out for these creatures, and actually 
reinforcing their own existence with residues of your creative and 
sympathetic powers. In times of psychological stress or crisis, quite 
unwittingly you withhold this strong reinforcement. 

"In the cats' deaths, both cats inherited the peculiar illness, which 
was a virus, that killed them. In the case of the first cat, you were able 
to reinforce its strength and maintain its health for quite a while, and 
then you needed your energies for yourselves. The second cat barely 
enjoyed such reinforcement at all, and quickly succumbed. 

"Your dog's illness was incipient. You could not have maintained his 
health for many long years in any case. I would like to make clear, of 
course, that animals certainly do have energy to maintain their own 
health, but this is strongly reinforced as a 



268 


Jane Roberts 


rule by the vitality of human beings to whom the animals are 
emotionally attached. The fact is, you were not able to give your dog 
that added emotional vitality at a time when he needed it most. There is 
no need to blame yourselves. It was beyond your control. 

"Animals, like people, sense when they are a burden, and the dog 
sensed that he was a burden, and also something of a nuisance. I would 
have preferred that you did not ask me this question, but since you did, 
and since you both loved the dog, it deserves an answer." 

Mischa, who was part shelty, or Shetland collie, was the last dog 
we've had. He certainly was a true companion to us. Even now, as I 
write about him over 16 years later, I feel a strong emotional pull 
toward him . 


SESSION 907— April 14, 1980 

8:47 p.m. MONDAY 

(It's hard for us to believe that five and a half weeks have passed follow- 
ing Jane's last regularly scheduled session, the 906th for March 6. She's 
held but one private session, on April 9, since. 

Session 906, in which Seth discussed viruses and the social aspects of 
many diseases, turned on Jane so much that the next day she wrote several 
additional pages on those subjects. The material came from both Seth 
and "herself," and I added it to the notes for that session. It's quite 
frustrating that we have no room in Dreams for such interesting infor- 
mation. Perhaps Seth will develop it in another work. In putting together 
the Seth books most of my decisions concern what to leave out, rather 
than what to include. 

I had the same feelings of limitation concerning the session for April 
9. In it Seth dealt with the creation of art: not only by "natural man, " 
but by other creatures — and yes, also the flora — of the earth. 1 

While Jane has been enjoying many periods of ease and relaxation, 
she's also had bouts of blueness over her general stiffness and walking 
difficulties [her "symptoms"] . But she's finally dispensed with the last 
stages of her cold, which had turned out to be much heavier than mine, 
and is feeling a resurgence of energy for the sessions. Her own work has 
been going well for the most part, however — she expects to finish Chapter 



Dreams, 'Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


12 of' God of Jane tomorrow. Became of her concentration on that book 
she hasn't done much on her book of poetry, If We Live Again, since 
late February; and as I mentioned in the Preface for Dreams, she laid 
aside her third Seven novel, Oversoul Seven and the Museum of Time, 
in May 1979 when she began God of Jane. As for myself, I've 
progressed to working with Session 860 [for June 13, 1979], which 
bridges chapters 8 and 9 in Mass Events. 

Today Jane reread her recent sessions for Dreams; she wanted to 
resume work on the book tonight, and picked up on it from Seth through- 
out the day. She told me bits of the material at times, but I didn't retain 
them. [She also relayed to me Seth's comments about an article on bird 
migration that I read to her while we were having lunch, but I lost those 
too.] Jane called me early for the session — at 8:20, while I was still busy 
with Mass Events. She wanted to get started: "I still feel nervous about 
going back to the book. ..." 

As soon as she delivered the first phrase of the first full sentence for 
Chapter 6, 1 recalled that she'd accurately quoted it to me this afternoon, 
saying that that was the way Seth would start the session.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Dictation. 

(With humor: "Hooray. ") 

(Slowly:) Chapter Six. Now: Any real discussion of genetic heritage 
must also bring up questions involving free will and determinism, 2 and 
to some extent those issues must also lead to questions concerning the 
nature of the reasoning mind itself. 

Reasoning, as you are familiar with it, is the result of mental or 
psychic processes functioning in a space-time context, and in a 
particular fashion. To some extent, then, reasoning — again, as you are 
familiar with it (underlined) — is the result of a lack of available 
knowledge. You try to "reason things out," because the answer is not in 
front of you. If it were, you would "know," and hence have no need to 
question. 

The reasoning mind is a uniquely human and physical phenomenon. 
(Long pause.) It depends upon conscious thinking, problem-solving 
methods, and it is a natural human blossoming, a spectacular mental 
development in its own framework of activity. 

Your technology is one of the results of that reasoning mind. That 
"reasoning" is necessary, however, because of the lack of a 



270 


Jane Roberts 


larger, immediate held of knowledge. Thoughts are mental activity, 
scaled to time and space terms so that they are like mental edifices built 
to certain dimensions only. Your thoughts make you human 
(underlined). 

(Still slowly at 8:59:) Other creatures have their own kinds of mental 
activity, however. They also have different kinds of immediate 
perceptions of reality. All species are united by their participation in 
emotional states, however. It is not just that all species of life have 
feeling, but that all participate in dimensions of emotional reality. It has 
been said that only men have a moral sense, that only men have free 
will — if indeed free will is possible at all. The word "moral" has endless 
connotations, of course. Yet animals have their own "morality," their 
own codes of honor, their own impeccable senses of balance with all 
other creatures. (Pause.) They have loving emotional relationships, 
complicated societies, 3 and in a certain sense at least — an important one 
— they also have their arts and sciences. But those "arts and sciences" 
are not based upon reasoning, as you understand it. 

Animals also possess independent volition, and while 1 am 
emphasizing animals here, the same applies to any creature, large or 
small: insect, bird, fish, or worm; to plant life; to cells, atoms, or 
electrons. They possess free will in relationship to the condi tions of 
their existen ce (underlined). 

The conditions of existence are largely determined by genetic 
structure. Free will must then of course function in accordance with 
genetic integrity. Genetic structure makes possible physical organisms 
through which life is to be experienced, and to a large extent that 
structure must determine the kind of action possible in the world, and 
the way or ways in which volition can be effectively expressed. 

The beaver is not free to make a spider web. (Long pause.) In human 
beings the genetic structure largely determines physical characteristics 
such as height, color of eyes, color of hair, color of skin — and, of 
course, more importantly, the number of fingers and toes, and the other 
specific physical attributes of your specieshood. So physically, and on 
his physical attributes alone, a man cannot use his free will to fly like a 
bird, or to perform physical acts for which the human body is not 
equipped. 

The body is equipped to perform far better, in a variety of ways, than 
you give it credit for, however — but the fact remains 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


271 


that the genetic structure focuses volition. The genetic apparatus and the 
chromosomal messages actually contain far more information than is 
ever used. That genetic information can, for example, be put together in 
an infinite number of ways. (Long pause.) The species cares for itself in 
the event of any possible circumstance, so that the genetic messages 
also carry an endless number of triggers that will change genetic 
combinations if this becomes necessary. 

Beyond that, however, genetic messages are coded in such a way 
that there is a constant give-and-take between those messages and the 
present experience of any given individual. That is, no genetic event is 
inevitable. 

Now besides this physical genetic structure, there is an inner bank of 
psychic information that in your terms would contain the "past" history 
— the reincamational history — of the individual. This provides an 
overall reservoir of psychic characteristics, leanings, abilities, 
knowledge, that is as much a part of the individual's heritage as the 
genetic structure is a part of the physical heritage. 

A person of great intelligence may be bom from a family of idiots, 
for example, because of that reincamational structure. Musical ability 
may thus appear complete — 

(9:27. We were startled by the sudden ringing of the telephone.) 

Take your break. 

(A close friend, one who used to attend Jane's ESP class, had called 
our unlisted number to ask one of us some psychic questions. Jane had 
been jolted out of trance, of course. After I hung up we wondered why 
our friend, who knows our usual routine so well, hadn't realized that 
we'd probably be having a session at this time on a Monday evening. 

Yet, at 9:30 Jane resumed the session just as though there hadn't been 
any interruption.) 

— with great technical facility, regardless of family background, 
genetically speaking, and again, the reincamational bank of 
characteristics accounts for such events. That inner reincamational 
psychic structure is also responsible for triggering certain genetic 
messages while ignoring others, or for triggering certain combinations 
of genetic messages. In actuality, of course — say that I smiled — all 
time is simultaneous, and so all reincamational lives occur at once. 

(Pause.) Perhaps an analogy will help. An actor throwing him- 



272 


Jane Roberts 


self or herself into a role, even momentarily lost in the part, is still alive 
and functioning as himself or herself in a context that is larger than the 
play. The character in the play is seemingly alive (creatively) for the 
play's duration, perception being limited to that framework, yet to play 
that role the actor draws upon the experience of his own life. He brings 
to bear his own understanding, compassion, artistry, and if he is a good 
actor, or if she is, then when the play is over the actor is a better person 
for having played the role. 

Now in the greater framework of reincamational existences you 
choose your roles, or your lives, but the lines that you speak, the 
situations that you meet, are not predetermined. "You" live or exist in a 
larger framework of activity even while you live your life, and there is 
a rambunctious interplay between the yous in time and the you outside 
of time. 

( Long pause.) The you inside of time adopts a reasoning mind. It is a 
kind of creative (underlined) psychological face that you use for the 
purposes of your life's drama. This psychological face of our analogy 
has certain formal, ceremonial features, so that you mentally and 
psychologically tend to perceive only those data that are available 
within the play's formal structure. You ca nn ot see into the future, for 
example, or into the past. 

You reason out your position. Otherwise your free will would have 
no meaning in a physical framework, for the number of choices 
available would be so multitudinous that you could not make up your 
mind to act within time: With all the opportunities of creativity, and 
with your own greater knowledge instantly available, you would be 
swamped by so many stimuli that you literally could not physically 
respond, and so your particular kinds of civilization and science and art 
could not have been accomplished — and regardless of their flaws they 
are magnificent accomplishments, unique products of the reasoning 
mind. 

Without the reasoning mind the artist would have no need to paint, 
for the immediacy of his mental vision would be so instant and 
blinding, so mentally accomplished , that there would be no need to try 
any physical rendition of it. So nowhere do I ever mean to demean the 
qualities or excellence of the reasoning mind as you understand it. 

You have, however, become so specialized in its use, so prejudiced 
in its favor, that your tendency is to examine all other 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


273 


kinds of' consciousness using the reasoning mind as the only yardstick 
by which to judge intelligent life. You are surrounded everywhere by 
other kinds of consciousness whose validity you have largely ignored, 
whose psychic brotherhood you have dismissed — kinds of 
consciousness in the animal kingdom particularly, that deal with a 
different kind of knowing, but who share with you the reality of keen 
emotional experience, and who are innately aware of biological and 
psychic values, but in ways that have escaped your prejudiced 
examination. 

To some extent that emotional reality is also expressed at other levels 
— as your own is — in periods of dreaming, in which animals, like men, 
participate in a vast cooperative venture that helps to form the 
psychological atmosphere in which your lives must first of all exist. 

End of dictation. End of session, unless you have a question. Ruburt 
can relax now (with amusement). 

("Okay, Seth. No questions. That was very good. ") 

I bid you a fond good evening. 

("Thank you. Good night. ") 

(10:01 p.m. "Gee, I thought some of that was great while I was giving 
it, but now I can't remember what it was, " Jane said as soon as Seth had 
gone. "But I feel better. ... I think I got all kinds of goodies out of all 
proportion to time. " 

Once the session was over, Billy and Mitzi came out to play.) 


NOTES. Session 907 

I. These excerpts from the session for April 9 (which we hadn't 
requested, by the way) indicate Seth's response to discussions Jane and 
I had been having about our personal functions as artists, as well as the 
use of art generally in our chosen probable reality. As usual, Seth had 
added his own wider, penetrating views: 

"All creatures of whatever degree have their own appreciation of 
esthetics . Many such creatures merge their arts so perfectly into their 
lives that it is impossible to separate the two: the spider's web, for 
example, or the beaver's dam — and there are endless other examples. 
This is not 'blind instinctive behavior' at all, but the result of well- 
ordered spontaneous artistry. 



274 


Jane Roberts 


"Art is not a specifically human endeavor, though man likes to 
believe that this is so. Art is above all a natural characteristic. I try to 
straddle your definitions — but flowers, for example, in a fashion see 
themselves as their own artistic creations. They have an esthetic 
appreciation of their own colors — a different kind, of course, than your 
perception of color. But nature seeks to outdo itself in terms that are 
most basically artistic, even while those terms may also include quite 
utilitarian purposes. The natural man, then, is a natural artist. In a sense, 
painting is man's natural attempt to create an original but coherent, 
mental yet physical interpretation of his own reality — and by extension 
to create a new version of reality for his species." 

(To me, loudly:) "You are still learning. Your work is still de- 
veloping. How truly unfortunate you would be if that were not the case! 
There is always a kind of artistic dissatisfaction that any true artist feels 
with work that is completed, for he is always aware of the tug and pull, 
and the tension, between the sensed ideal and its manifestation. In a 
certain fashion the artist is looking for a creative solution to a sensed 
but never clearly stated problem or challenge, and it is an adventure 
that is literally unending. It must be one that has no clearly stated 
destination, in usual terms. In the most basic of ways, the artist cannot 
say where he is going, for if he knows ahead of time he is not creating 
but copying. 

"The true artist is involved with the inner workings of himself with 
the universe — a choice, I remind you, that he or she has made, and so 
often the artist does indeed forsake the recognized roads of recognition. 
And more, seeing that, he often does not know how to assess his own 
progress, since his journey has no recognizable creative destination. By 
its nature art basically is meant to put each artist of whatever kind into 
harmony with the universe, for the artist draws upon the same creative 
energy from which birth emerges." 

2. Free will is the philosophical doctrine that the individual has the 
freedom to choose, without coercion, some actions consistent with his 
or her particular morals and ideals. Determinism is the opposing 
doctrine that everything, even the individual's course of action, is 
determined by conditions outside one's will. 

Through the centuries philosophical and religious thinkers 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


275 


have created numerous complicated variations of ideas involving free 
will and determinism, so that neither thesis is as simple as it first 
appears to be. Man related the concept of free will long ago to the 
question of whether he could deliberately choose evil, for example. He 
still does. And he still struggles with questions about his freedom 
before God's omnipotence and foreknowledge, and whether those 
qualities cause events, or can cause them, and whether they involve 
predestination. Opposing determinism is the idea that man has always 
fought for his personal responsibility — that instead of being controlled 
entirely by his heritage, he's capable of forming new syntheses of 
thought and action based upon the complicated patterns of his own 
history. 

In a strange way, determinism has always seemed lacking as a 
concept to Jane and me — for if it means what it's supposed to mean, 
then surely human beings set up the parameters within which 
determinism is said to operate. I see this as a contradiction of the notion 
that the individual is entirely at the mercy of his or her history and of 
nature. How can we be, if through the ages we've created that history 
and nature against which we react? In other words, on joint and 
individual scales, vast though they may be, we do create our joint and 
individual realities. 

I want to add that even with ideas of religious determinism — that 
man cannot know God's will, for instance, or is quite dependent upon 
that divine grace — we're still creating our conscious ideas of what God 
is, in those terms. So once again we have a determinism that operates 
within our sensual and intellectual boundaries: another framework 
within which we ceaselessly attempt to understand "the meaning of 
life." 

Even in modem terms, our psychological and medical knowledge of 
mind and brain have added more complications to the doctrine of free 
will, yet it survives and grows. And all the while I worked on this note, 
I felt strong connections involving free will, determinism, and probable 
realities — connections largely unexpressed and unexplored in our 
world's societies. 

3. See the Preface for Dreams. In the notes immediately preceding the 
private session for September 13, 1979, I quoted some of the very 
evocative material on animal cultures and civilizations that Seth had 
given in Chapter 5 of Mass Events. 



276 


Jane Roberts 


SESSION 908— April 16, 1980 

8:49 p.m. WEDNESDAY 

(This morning I showed Jane the portrait in oils that I'm working on. 
It's of one of my imaginary male heads, and I began it a week ago, 
following Seth's material on art for me in the private session for April 9. 
[See Note 1 for the last session.] I explained to Jane that even while it's 
incomplete, the painting contains improvements that I can already tell 
will be developed further in the next one. Once I start a work in a certain 
mode, it becomes somewhat set in that expression; this is inevitable if one 
is to ever complete the physical painting. Those sensed, additional im- 
provements have to wait for the next effort: A creative tension between 
the present and the future is set up, then — one that I've often felt, an 
impatience to leap ahead to the next step even while I'm still working out 
the current one. I asked that Seth comment upon the painting tonight if 
he cared to. 

Without being specific before the session, Jane said she felt "lots of 
stuff from Seth churning around. " Even though Monday's session had 
been for Dreams, she was still nervous about going back to the book 
after being away from it for well over a month before that — yet she was 
ready to go.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

(With a laugh: "Good evening, Seth. ") 

Now: The reasoning mind represents human mental activity in a 
space and time context, as mentioned earlier. 

Again, it is involved with the trial-and-error method. It sets up 
hypotheses (pause), and its very existence is dependent upon a lack of 
available knowledge — knowledge that it seeks to discover. 

In the dreaming state the characteristics of the reasoning mind 
become altered, and from a waking viewpoint it might seem distorted 
in its activity. What actually happens, however, is that in the dreaming 
state you are presented with certain kinds of immediate knowledge. It 
often appears out of context in usual terms. It is not organized 
according to the frameworks understood by the reasoning portions of 
your mind, and so to some extent in dreams you encounter large 
amounts of information that you cannot categorize. 

The information may not fit into your recognizable time or 



Dreams, 'Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


277 


space slots. There are, in fact, many important issues connected with 
the dreaming state that can involve genetic activation of certain kinds: 
information processing on the part of the species, the insertion or 
reinsertion of civilizing elements — and all of these are also connected 
with the reincamational aspects of dreaming. 

I have not touched upon some of these subjects before, since I 
wanted to present them in that larger context of man's origins and 
historic appearance as a species. I also wanted to make certain points, 
stressing the importance of dreams as they impinge upon and help form 
cultural environments. Dreams also sometimes help in showing the 
pathways that can be taken to advantage by an individual, or by a group 
of individuals, and therefore help clarify the ways in which free will 
might most advantageously be directed. So I hope to cover all of these 
subjects. 

(Long pause.) Let us first of all return momentarily to the subject of 
tbe reasoning mind, its uses and characteristics. It seems to the 
reasoning mind that it must look outside of itself for information, for it 
operates in concert with the physical senses, which present it with only 
a limited amount of information about the environment at any given 
time. The physical eyes cannot see today the dawn that will come in the 
morning. The legs today cannot walk down tomorrow's street, so if the 
mind wants to know what is going to happen tomorrow, or what is 
happening now, outside of the physical senses' domain, then it must try 
through reason to deduce the information that it wants from the 
available information that it has. It must rely upon observation to make 
its deductions accordingly. In a fashion, it must divide to conquer. It 
must try to deduce the nature of the whole it ca nn ot perceive from the 
portions that are physically available. 

(9:10.) Children begin to count by counting on their fingers. Later, 
fingers are dispensed with but the idea of counting remains. There have 
been people throughout history who mentally performed mathematical 
feats that appear most astounding, and almost in a matter of moments. 
Some, had they lived in your century, would have been able to 
outperform computers (just as some are outperforming computers these 
days!). In most cases where such accomplishments show themselves, 
they do so in a child far too young to have learned scientific 
mathematical procedures to begin with, and often such feats are 
displayed by 



278 


Jane Roberts 


people who are otherwise classified as idiots (idiot savants), and who 
are incapable of intellectual reasoning. 

Indeed, when a child is involved, the keener his use of the reasoning 
mind becomes the dimmer his mathematical abilities grow. Others, 
children [or adults] who would be classified as mentally deficient, can 
tell, or have been able to tell, the day of the week that any given date, 
past or present, would fall upon. Others have been able, while 
performing various tasks, to keep a precise count of the moments from 
any given point in time. There have been children, again, with highly 
accomplished musical abilities, and great facility with music's technical 
aspects — all such accomplishments before the assistance of any kind of 
advanced education. 

Now, some of those children went on to become great musicians, 
while others lost their abilities along the way, so what are we dealing 
with in such cases? We are dealing with direct knowing. We are dealing 
with the natural perceptions of the psyche, at least when we are 
speaking in human terms. We arc dealing with natural, direct cognition 
as it exists before and after (pause) man's experience with the reasoning 
mind. 

Some of those abilities show themselves in those classified as 
mentally deficient simply because all of the powers of the reasoning 
mind are not activated . In children under such conditions, the reasoning 
mind has not yet developed in all of its aspects sufficiently, so that in a 
certain area direct cognition shines through with its brilliant capacity. 

Direct cognition is an inner sense. In physical terms you might call it 
remote sensing. Your physical body, and your physical existence, are 
based upon certain kinds of direct cognition, and it is responsible for 
the very functioning of the reasoning mind itself. Scientists like to say 
that animals operate through simple instinctive behavior, without will 
or volition: It is no accomplishment for a spider to make its web, a 
beaver its dam, a bird its nest, because according to such reasoning , 
such creatures cannot perform otherwise. The spider must spin his web. 
If he chooses not to, he will not survive. But by that same reasoning — 
to which, of course, I do not subscribe — you should also add that man 
can take no credit either for his intellect, since man must think, and 
cannot help doing so. 

Some pessimistic scientists would say: "Of course," for man 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


279 


and animal alike are driven by their instincts, and man's claim to free 
will is no more than an illusion. 

(9:33.) Man's reasoning mind, however, with its fascinating capacity 
for logic and deduction, and for observation, rests upon (pause) a direct 
cognition — a direct cognition that powers his thoughts, that makes 
thinking itself possible. He thinks because he knows how to think by 
thinking (intently), even though the true processes of thought are 
enigmas to the reasoning mind. 1 

(Long pause.) In dreams the reasoning mind loosens its hold upon 
perception. From your standpoint vou are almost faced with too much 
data. The reasoning mind attempts to catch what it can as it reassembles 
its abilities toward waking, but the net of its reasoning simply cannot 
hold that assemblage of information. Instead it is processed at other 
levels of the psyche. Dreams also involve a kind of psychological 
perspective with which you have no physical equivalent — and therefore 
such issues are most difficult to discuss. 

The reasoning mind is highly necessary, effective, and suitable for 
physical existence, and for the utilization of free will, which is very 
dependent upon perception of clearly distinguishable actions. In the 
larger framework of existence, however, it is simply one of 
innumerable methods of organizing data. A psychological filing system, 
if you prefer. 

Your dreaming self possesses pyschological dimensions that escape 
you, and they serve to connect genetic and reincamational systems. You 
must, again, realize that the self that you know is only a part of your 
larger identity — an identity that is [also] historically actualized in other 
times than your own. You must also understand that mental activity is of 
the utmost potency. You experience your dreams from your own 
perspective, as a rule. (Long pause.) I am simply trying to give you a 
picture of one kind of dream occurrence, or to show you one picture of 
dream activity of which you are not usually aware. 

If you are having a dream as yourself from your own perspective, 
another reincamational self may be having the same dream from its 
perspective — in which, of course, you play a minor role. In your dream, 
that reincamational self may appear as a minor character, quite on the 
periphery of your attention, and if the dream were to include an idea, 
say, for a play or an invention, then that play or invention might appear 
as a physical event in 



280 


Jane Roberts 


both historic times, to whatever degree it would be possible for the two 
individuals living in time to interpret that information. But culture 
throughout the ages was spread by more than physical means. Abilities 
and inventions were not dependent upon human migrations, but those 
migrations themselves were the result of information given in dreams, 
telling tribes of men the directions in which better homelands could be 
found. 

(Louder:) End of dictation. 

("Okay. ") 

(9:55.) Give us a moment. . . . Direct cognition: You know what you 
know. 

(To me:) Your knowledge knows how to flow through the techniques 
you have learned, to use them and become part of them, so that a 
painting emerges with a spontaneous wisdom. That is what you are 
learning. That is what the painting shows. That is where you are. 

To some extent each vision, each subject matter, will itself make 
minute alterations in technique if you allow it to. Your impulses have 
shadings as your colors do. They should mix and merge with your 
brushstrokes, so that the idea of your subject matter is almost magically 
contained in each spot of paint, and that is what you are learning. Or 
rather, you are learning to take advantage of your direct cognition. 

End of session. 

("Thank you. ") 

A hearty good evening — and tell our friend (Jane) to be more playful 
— work at it, I said (with much humor). 

("Good night, Seth") 

(10:01 p.m. "Boy," Jane said, "I sensed a whole bunch of stuff on 
dreams, and when I reached that part on reincarnation and dreams, I 
knew that's where I was supposed to get. I felt like it was great. " She'd 
begun to tune into Seth's material on idiots savants just before the session. 
"In certain parts of the book, like in the beginning and tonight, I feel 
like I've gone at an accelerated rate, outside time somehow, " she said. 
"And at a few other times in between, too. . . .") 


NOTE. Session 908 

1 . With a little reflection it become obvious, but I think it important to 
note that Jane's expression of the Seth material is cer- 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


281 


tainly the result of her direct cognition. Because she has to deliver it 
linearly in words, which take "time," she cannot produce her material 
almost at once, as the mathematical prodigy can his or her answers, but 
in their own way her communications with Seth are as psychologically 
clear and direct as the calculator's objective products are with numbers, 
or the musician's are with notes. From the very beginning of the 
sessions, in late 1963, I appreciated the speed with which Jane 
delivered the Seth material, and began recording the times involved 
throughout each session. I now think that spontaneously starting to do 
that reflected my own intuitive understanding of her direct cognition, 
long before either one of us knew how to describe it. And when Jane 
speaks extemporaneously for Seth, her delivery is even more rapid. It 
was most definitely faster — sometimes spectacularly so — during all of 
those years she gave sessions in ESP class. 

More is involved, of course. I've read that mathematical prodigies are 
in love with their numbers, and rely upon their dependability in an 
often unsure world. Jane has a deep love for words. Words, however, 
can be very elusive tools, and vary from language to language, although 
intrinsically through the Seth material Jane conveys depths of meaning 
that continue to develop within whatever language others may cast it. 
This psychological growth, and the many challenges involved, set her 
work apart from the mental calculator's numbers or the musician's 
notes, which are ever the same: Those friendly colu mns of figures, for 
instance, add up to identical sums in any language. In her own direct 
cognition Jane deals with feelings and ideas that are often quite 
divorced from any such reliability and acceptance. 

Regardless of who or what he is, then, with Jane's permission Seth 
adds his material to the information possessed by her reasoning mind — 
and thus offers it to the reasoning minds of others. 


SESSION 909 - April 21, 1980 

9:05 p.m. MONDAY 


(Just before she took a nap this noon, Jane received a letter from a man 
who explained that he'd married a woman with genetic deformities of her 



282 


Jane Roberts 


hands. A daughter just bom to the couple carries the same 'flans. " The 
writer has obviously learned much from reading the Seth material, and 
revealed insight as to why he and his lady had chosen to marry to begin 
with. Yet he still expressed sorrow, and asked: "Why?" He's troubled by 
the challenges of one who has to live with a so-called deformed wife — 
and now a child — each day. Jane plans to inform him that he and his 
family are doing much better than they know. 

During her nap, Jane had a little out-of-body experience that she 
described to me as soon as she got up. Then this afternoon she picked up 
from Seth that in a new chapter he'd explain how physical deformities 
are, among other things, manifestations of the great range of abilities 
encompassed within our species' genetic pool, and that we retain such 
flexibility in case wide changes are ever needed. She added that our 
genetic requirements are also linked to our reincamational patterns. The 
attributes that can result in the supposedly handicapped, then, are needed 
to keep our species adaptable in many, and often unexpected, ways. Jane 
had more to say, but I didn't write it down at the time. She thought Seth 
might comment tonight upon the correspondent's situation. 

We held the session in the living room, as usual. Jane was very relaxed 
as she sat in her rocker. "I'm having it just because I want to, " she said, 
"But I don 't know how far I'll get. I'm really out of it. . . ."In back of her 
and off to her right, our cats, Billy and Mitzi, were crouching in the light 
cast on the rug by one of our homemade lamps from its position on a low 
bookcase: An insect, seemingly mesmerized by the illumination, was flying 
round and round inside the bright cone of the lampshade. The cats had 
been fascinated by this phenomenon for several minutes; just as Jane went 
into trance they lost patience and started to leap up at the insect. And 
although she began the session slowly, Jane proceeded right along with 
it.) 

(Whispering:) Good evening. 

("Good evening, Seth. ") 

Dictation. Now: Man's first encounter with physical reality in life is 
his experience with the state of his own consciousness. 

(I had to spoil the cats' fun: I had to get up and turn off the lamp 
before they pulled it off the bookcase. Jane waited in trance.) 

He is aware of a different kind of being. He encounters his 
consciousness first, and then he encounters the world — so I am saying, 
of course, that each person has an identity that is larger than the 
framework of consciousness with which you are usually familiar in life. 



Dreams, "Evolution/and Value Fulfillment 


283 


When you are bom, you understand that you have a new 
consciousness. You explore its ramifications. It is your primary 
evidence that you exist in flesh. Basically, each person must confront 
the experience of reality through a direct encounter with it. This 
encounter takes place through the use of the physical senses, of course, 
as they are used to perceive and interpret physical data. The very 
utilization of those senses, however, is dependent upon the nature of 
your consciousness itself, and that consciousness is aware of its power 
and action through the exercise of its own properties. 

Those "properties" are the faculties of the imagination, creativity, 
telepathy, clairvoyance, and dreaming, as well as the functions of logic 
and reason. You know that you dream. You know-that you think. Those 
are direct experiences. (Pause.) Anytime you use instruments to probe 
into the nature of reality, you are looking at a kind of secondary 
evidence, no matter how excellent the instruments may be. The 
subjective evidence of dreaming, for example, is far more "convincing" 
and irrefutable than is the evidence for an expanding universe, black 
holes, or even atoms and molecules themselves. Although instruments 
can indeed be most advantageous in many ways, they still present you 
with secondary rather than primary tools of investigation — and they 
distort the nature of reality far more than the subjective attributes of 
thoughts, feelings, and intuitions do. 

(9:21.) The human consciousness has not, therefore, developed the 
best and most proper "tool" with which to examine the nature of reality. 
It is because you have used other methods that much evidence escapes 
you — evidence that would show that the physical universe exists in 
quite different terms than is supposed. 

You are taught not to trust your subjective experience, which means 
that you are told not to trust vour initial and primary connection with 
reality. 

Evidence for reincarnation is quite available. There are enough 
instances of it, known and tabulated, to make an excellent case; and 
beside this there is evidence that remains psychologically invisible in 
your private lives, because you have been taught not to concentrate in 
that direction. 

There is enough evidence to build an excellent case for life after 
death. All of this involves direct experience — episodes, encountered by 
individuals, [that are] highly suggestive of the ai- 



284 


Jane Roberts 


terdeath hypothesis; but the hypothesis is never taken seriously by your 
established sciences. There is far more evidence for reincarnation and 
life after death than there is, for example, for the existence of black 
holes. (With amusement:) Few people have seen a black hole, to make 
the most generous statement possible, while countless people have had 
private reincamational experiences, or encounters that suggest the 
survival of the personality beyond death. 

Those experiences are usual. They have been reported by peoples of 
all kinds and in all ages, and they represent a common-sense kind of 
knowledge that is frowned upon by the men of learned universities. 
Throughout this book we will often be talking about experiences that 
are encountered in one way or another by most people, but are not 
given credence to on the part of the established fields of knowledge. 
Therefore, dreams will be considered throughout the book in various 
capacities as they are related through genetics, reincarnation, culture, 
and private life. We will also be considering the matter of free will and 
its role in invidual value fulfillment. 

(A closing note, added following Seth's completion of his sessions for 
Dreams on February 8, 1982: 

After we had published Seth's "Unknown" Reality in two volumes 
back in 1977 and 1979, Jane and I decided that we wanted to keep his 
books shorter, and to issue them more frequently. Never again would we 
go the way of two volumes, we thought — yet here we are, doing it once 
more! 

When I began putting together Seth's dictation for Dreams, and 
adding Jane's and my own notes, plus excerpts from other relevant ses- 
sions, it soon became obvious that the entire work was going to be too 
long for one volume. There would be publishing difficulties having to do 
with sheer bulk — with the cost of typesetting, with binding such a thick 
book, with marketing and price, and so forth. So with the help of our 
editor, Tarn Mossman, and others at Prentice-Hall, the decision was 
made to publish Dreams in two volumes. At first I was sorry for the 
reader's sake to think of Dreams being interrupted, yet glad for myself, 
for in addition to presenting Seth 's book dictation I was given the space 
in which to develop those other personal and secular themes of Seth's, 
Jane's, and my own that I think add even more dimensions of meaning to 
Dreams. 



Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment 


285 


This time, however, unlike the case with "Unknown" Reality, there 
won't be any two-year wait between the production of the two volumes for 
Dreams — only a few months at the most. In the meantime, here are 
Seth's chapter headings for the second volume, to show the direction his 
material takes:) 

Chapter 7 Genetics and Reincarnation. Gifts and "Liabilities." The Vast 
Sweep of the Genetic and Reincamational Scales. The 
Gifted and the Handicapped 

Chapter 8 When You Are Who You Are. The Worlds of Imagination and 
Reason, and the Implied Universe 
Chapter 9 Master Events and Reality Overlays 
Chapter 10 The Pleasure Principle. Group Dreams and Value 
Fulfillment 

Chapter 11 The Magical Approach, and the Relationships Between 
"Conservation" and Spontaneous Developments 
Chapter 12 Life Clouds 

(Seth used Session 909 as a bridge between chapters 6 and 7 in 
Dreams. This means that now the session also serves as a connective — 
a very effective lure, say — between volumes 1 and 2. Indeed, in retro- 
spect it also seems as though Seth, that "energy personality essence, " 
planned it that way! And Jane and I look forward with intense interest 
to the final version of Dreams, for as always this work will be as reveal- 
ing and educational for us as it will be for anybody else. I thank each 
reader for his or her patience in accepting the publication of Dreams in 
two volumes. Robert F. Butts.) 

